@@@@@


doc= 25190


Charles Shadwell (fl. 1692-1720), was a playwright; his patron was Lady Newtown. He served in the army in Portugal under Major-General Newton, governor of Londonderry, and in 1710 was supervisor of the excise in Kent. His play 'The Fair Quaker of Deal' (1710) was successfully performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, and followed by 'The Humours of the Army' (1713). His other plays were acted at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, and printed in 1720: 'Irish Hospitality', 'The Plotting Lovers', 'The Hasty Wedding', 'The Sham Prince', and 'Rotherich O'Connor'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25191


Shadwell, Sir Charles Frederick Alexander (1814-1886), naval officer, born on 31 January 1814, was the fourth son of Sir Lancelot Shadwell (1779-1850) and his wife, Harriet (died 1814), the sister of Sir John Richardson, judge of the court of common pleas. In 1827 he was entered as a scholar at the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, whence he passed into the navy in 1829. In 1833 he passed his examination, and on 28 June 1838 was made lieutenant. He was then appointed to the frigate 'Castor' (36 guns), going out to the Mediterranean, where in 1840 he was present at the operations on the coast of Syria, including the capture of Acre. In December 1841 he was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Fly', and for more than four years was employed in surveying in Torres Strait and on the northern coast of Australia. On the 'Fly' being paid out of commission, Shadwell was promoted commander (27 June 1846). He then studied for some time at the Royal Naval College, taking a certificate in 'steam', and devoting himself more especially to nautical astronomy. In February 1850 he was appointed to command the 'Sphinx', which he took out to the East Indies, and in her had an active share in the Second Anglo-Burmese War (1852), for which he twice received the thanks of the governor-general in council; on 7 February 1853 he was advanced to the rank of captain, and on 5 December he was nominated a CB. 
In August 1856 Shadwell commissioned the 'Highflyer' for the China station, where in 1857 he took part in the operations in the Canton River leading up to the capture of Canton in December, and in the disastrous attack on the Taku (Dagu) forts on 25 June 1859, when, in leading the landing party across the mud flat, he received a severe wound in the ankle, which rendered him permanently lame. In January 1860 he was relieved from the command of the 'Highflyer' and returned to England. 
From February 1861 to August 1862 Shadwell commanded the 'Aboukir' (90 guns) in the Mediterranean and West Indies, and from October 1862 to June 1864 the 'Hastings', the flagship of Sir Lewis Jones at Queenstown. He was captain-superintendent of the Gosport victualling yard and of Haslar Hospital from June 1864 until his promotion to the rank of rear-admiral on 15 January 1869. From August 1871 to May 1875 he was commander-in-chief in China, and was made KCB on 24 May 1873. He was promoted vice-admiral in 1875 and became an admiral on the retired list in 1879. From 1878 to 1881 he was president of the Royal Naval College at Greenwich, after which he lived in retirement at Meadow Bank, Melksham, in Wiltshire. 
Despite his long, and in some instances brilliant, service, Shadwell had rather the temperament of a scholar than of a warrior. He was deeply attached to the study of nautical astronomy, on which he published a number of pamphlets. For many years he was engaged on a work on the subject, which gradually assumed almost encyclopaedic proportions without ever reaching his ideal of completeness, and which remained unfinished at his death. He was elected FRS on 6 June 1861, and was a fellow of the Royal Astronomical and Royal Geographical societies. He died, unmarried, at Meadow Bank, on 1 March 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 25192


Shadwell, Sir John (1671-1747), physician, son of Thomas Shadwell (c.1640-1692), poet laureate and playwright, and Anne ('fl'. 1661-1705), actress, daughter of Thomas Gibbs of Norwich, was born in Middlesex, probably at Chelsea. On 15 May 1685 he matriculated from University College, Oxford, later migrating to All Souls College. He graduated BA on 1 June 1689 (3 November 1688, according to the register at All Souls), MA on 26 April 1693, BM on 19 April 1697, and DM on 5 June 1701. 
On 30 November 1701 Shadwell was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and was admitted on 3 December. He read no papers, but one letter he received he set before the society, an 'Account of an extraordinary skeleton' ('PTRS', 41, 1741, 820). He was appointed physician-extraordinary to Queen Anne on 9 November 1709, and on 9 February 1712 was sworn one of the physicians-in-ordinary, in the place of Martin Lister, being succeeded in his former office by Hans Sloane. He was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December 1712. The accounts of the queen's last illness in December 1713-14 in Abel Boyer's 'History of the Reign of Queen Anne' are derived from Shadwell's letters to the duke and duchess of Shrewsbury, sent while Shrewsbury was lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1713. Boyer recorded Shadwell's opinion that the queen died of 'gouty humour translating itself upon the brain' (Boyer, 714). He continued to be physician-in-ordinary to George I and George II, and was knighted on 12 June 1715. For many years he lived in Windmill Street in London, and in 1735 withdrew from practice and retired to France, where he remained until 1740. Following his retirement to the continent, Shadwell was witness to the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 1737, and supplied an account of this to the Royal Society ('PTRS', 41, 1739, 252-61). 
Shadwell was twice married: with his first wife, who died on 14 April 1722, he had one son and three daughters. He married second Ann Binns, at Somerset House chapel, on 12 March 1725; and on 29 June 1731 he made his will in her favour. Shadwell died at Windmill Street on 4 January 1747. He was buried on 8 January at Bath Abbey, where there is a tomb with an elaborate epitaph to his memory. Lady Shadwell survived until 1777. Shadwell published little other than an edition of his father's works in 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 25193


Shadwell, Sir Lancelot (1779-1850), judge, was born on 3 May 1779, the eldest son of Lancelot Shadwell, a barrister and eminent conveyancer, and his wife, Elizabeth Whitmore, third daughter of Charles Whitmore of Southampton. He was educated at Eton College, and then at St John's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in the Michaelmas term of 1796. In 1800 he became seventh wrangler, obtained the second chancellor's medal, and graduated BA. He was elected a fellow of his college on 23 March 1801, took his MA degree in 1803, and received the honorary degree of LLD in 1842. He was admitted as a member of Lincoln's Inn on 30 June 1797, and was called to the bar on 10 February 1803. 
On 8 January 1805 Shadwell married Harriet, daughter of Anthony Richardson, a London merchant; they had six sons including Sir Charles Frederick Alexander Shadwell (1814-1886), before Harriet's death on 25 May 1814. Shadwell married again on 4 January 1816. His second wife, Frances, was the youngest daughter of Captain Locke, and together they had six sons and five daughters, increasing the Shadwell family to seventeen. Frances survived Shadwell and died on 27 October 1854, aged sixty-six. 
After practising for eighteen years, with much success, as a junior in the court of chancery, Shadwell was appointed a king's counsel on 8 December 1821, and took his seat within the bar on the first day of the Hilary term of 1822. As a QC, Shadwell refused to follow the practice of taking briefs in more than one equity court, preferring to give each case his undivided attention. At the general election in June 1826 he obtained a seat in the House of Commons for the borough of Ripon through the influence of Miss Elizabeth Sophia Lawrence, under whose will he subsequently received a handsome bequest. On 14 February 1827 he introduced a bill for the limitation of a writ of right and for the amendment of the law of dower, but it did not get beyond the committee stage. His parliamentary career was short, for on 31 October 1827 he was appointed vice-chancellor of England in the place of Sir Anthony Hart. On 16 November of the same year he was sworn a member of the privy council and knighted. 
Shadwell presided in the vice-chancellor's court for nearly twenty-three years. During this period he twice filled the office of a commissioner of the great seal: from 23 April 1835 to 16 January 1836 in conjunction with Sir C. C. Pepys (afterwards Lord Cottenham) and Sir J. B. Bosanquet, and again from 19 June to 15 July 1850 in conjunction with Lord Langdale and Sir R. M. Rolfe (afterwards Lord Cranworth). On 24 June he was seized with a sudden illness, which prevented him from sitting again during the continuance of the second commission. He died at his residence, Barn Elms, Surrey, on 10 August 1850, aged seventy-one, and was buried in Barnes churchyard. 
The last person to hold the title of vice-chancellor of England, Shadwell was a learned and able judge, with a reputation for being courteous and polite. He was elected a bencher of Lincoln's Inn on 30 January 1822 and acted as treasurer in 1833. Outside the law, he had many interests. He was president of the Society of Psychrolutes, who bathed out of doors daily from November to March. He was in the habit of bathing every day, whatever the weather, in one of the creeks of the Thames near Barn Elms, and was said while thus engaged once to have granted an injunction. He was a tireless walker when young, and in 1797 he served as a member of the light horse volunteers. Shadwell also enjoyed skating. He was also something of a scholar, having translated both the 'Iliad' and the 'Gospel According to St Matthew' from Greek into English (1844-7 and 1859 respectively). He was thought of as a witty judge and was regarded as having been the best junior counsel of his time. 
The vice-chancellor's eighth son, the second from his second marriage, 


@@@@@


doc= 25194


Lawrence Shadwell (1823-1887), army officer, was born at Old Windsor, Berkshire, in July 1823. He was educated at Eton College and entered the army as ensign in the 98th foot on 26 April 1841. He served in the China expedition of 1842, the Punjab campaign of 1848-9, and in the Crimean War of 1854-6. He held the appointment of assistant quartermaster-general in the Crimea during the greater part of the war. On 2 August 1853 he married Helen Frances, daughter of Edward Coleridge, vicar of Mapledurham. After his return to England he was assistant quartermaster-general to the troops in the northern district from April 1857 to September 1861, in Nova Scotia from January to August 1862, and in the south-western district of England from April 1864 to February 1866. From 1866 to 1871 he was military assistant at the War Office. He was promoted to the rank of major-general on 6 March 1868, and was created a companion of the Bath on 2 June 1869. He was granted a reward for distinguished and meritorious services in January 1874, and was promoted lieutenant-general on 27 April 1879, and general on 1 July 1881. He retired from the army on 25 July 1881, and died at Reading on 16 August 1887; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25195


Shadwell, Thomas (c.1640-1692), playwright and poet, was born in Norfolk, either at Santon Hall or Broomhill House, Weeting, the son of John (died 1684) and Sarah Shadwell. His grandfather was George Shadwell, of Linedon (Lyndowne) in Enville, Staffordshire, and theirs was a minor but long-established gentry family from the county. John Shadwell, a lawyer, was of Pembroke College, Cambridge, and the Middle Temple. He inherited a good fortune and substantial property in Thetford, Norfolk, but following his support for the king in the civil war, he was forced to 'sell and spend good part of his Estate' ('Works', 1.xvii). The family moved to Ireland shortly after the Restoration. 
Thomas Shadwell had the 'Birth and Education, without the Fortune of a Gentleman' ('Works', 3.20). He was one of eleven children, and was described as his father's heir apparent in 1658. He was educated at home where he learnt 'all... gentleman-like exercises' (ibid., 5.292). About 1655 Shadwell attended the grammar school in Bury St Edmunds, which was later the setting for one of his comedies, 'Bury Fair'. On 17 December 1656 he matriculated from Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. In 1687, attacked by Dryden as a weak classical scholar, he was 'provoked' to demonstrate his knowledge by translating the tenth satire of Juvenal, maintaining in the publication's preface that at school and Cambridge he had a reputation as a good Greek and Latin scholar (ibid., 5.292-3). In his will he left his son 'latin and philosophical books', including Hobbes's, but he was no match for Dryden's learning (ibid., 1.ccxxxv-ccxxxvi). He left Cambridge without taking a degree, and entered the Middle Temple on 7 July 1658. He studied there and then travelled, visiting Ireland for four months at the age of twenty-three, probably visiting his family. Some time between 1658 and 1668 he worked as a clerk to the auditor of the exchequer, Sir Robert Long. 
Some time between 23 February 1663 and 22 January 1664 Shadwell married Anne Gibbs [
Among the Shadwells' children were George, baptized on 20 January 1674 and buried on 20 February 1678; William, baptized on 21 September 1680 and buried on 27 October 1686; and Anne, who was baptized on the day of William's burial; Shadwell called her 'the greatest comfort to me of all my children' ('Works', 1.ccxxxvi). Sir John Shadwell (1671-1747), who matriculated at University College, Oxford, in 1685, and became physician to Queen Anne and George I, was knighted on 12 June 1715, and died on 4 January 1747. 
Shadwell's first play, 'The Sullen Lovers', was premiered on 2 May 1668 by the Duke's Company, for whom Shadwell was to write most of his plays. Anne Shadwell played the 'sullen lover' Emilia. The play, the first of several which Shadwell based on Moliere, was acted for twelve days. Its considerable success was due to its 'little witty expressions', royal support, and the fact that 'all the Duke and everybody's talk' was that the self-important know-all Sir Positive At-All was a satire on Dryden's brother-in-law the playwright Sir Robert Howard, whose brother, the playwright Edward Howard, was lampooned as the conceited 'Poet Ninny' (Pepys, 9.185-6, 190-91). Sir Positive represents an attack on the heroic drama of Sir Robert Howard and Dryden. In the preface Shadwell attacks authors who have 'wild Romantick Tales, wherein they strain Love and Honour to that ridiculous Height, that it becomes Burlesque' ('Works', 1.11). 
The following year Edward Howard published a poem, 'The British Prince', and Shadwell wrote one for a series of mock-commendatory poems ridiculing his style. This was the first work produced collaboratively by the circle of court wits led by George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, in the 1670s. These included the earl of Rochester, Charles Sackville, Lord Buckhurst (later earl of Dorset), John, Lord Vaughan, Sir Charles Sedley, Sir George Etherege, William Wycherley, George Savile, and Fleetwood Sheppard. The group, all whigs, shared Shadwell's literary tastes, and were an important source of patronage. Sedley corrected two of Shadwell's plays and gave him the profits of his own 'Bellamira' in 1687, and Shadwell wrote a verse letter to Wycherley 'Inspir'd with high and mighty Ale' ('Works', 5.227). In 1678 Nell Gwynn said that Dorset 'drinks ale with Shadwell' at the Duke's Theatre 'all day long' (ibid., 5.430). Shadwell's conversational skills and talent for repartee must have been of a high order to allow him intimacy with 'the wittiest men of England' (ibid., 5.291). This group valued impromptu wit in conversation over polished wit in writing. Shadwell behaved as a gentlemanly amateur rather than as the professional writer he really was, a fact ambivalently treated in 'An Allusion to Horace' (1675), where Rochester says 'true Comedy' is only achieved by two 'Moderne Witts', 'hasty Shadwell, and slow Wicherly', but that '
Shadwells unfinisht works doe yet impart, 

Great proofs of force of Nature, none of Art. 

' After Shadwell's death, Wycherley told Alexander Pope that Shadwell 'knew how to start a fool very well, but that he was never able to run him down': that is, he could not maintain characterization throughout his plays (Spence, 1.205-6). 
Shadwell dedicated 'The Sullen Lovers' to William Cavendish, duke of Newcastle, who had been Ben Jonson's patron. Shadwell says that Newcastle found him out in his 'obscurity', and helped him several years before he was invited to Welbeck and 'daily admitted into' the duke's 'public and private conversation' ('Works', 1.19-20). Four more of Shadwell's plays were to have what Dryden called 'northern dedications'. Newcastle employed Shadwell to finish and 'theatricalise' his play 'The Triumphant Widow' (acted 1674). In it Shadwell, who wrote more than half of this play, may have satirized Dryden as the hapless, Jonson-hating poet Crambo. Later, Shadwell reused two parts in 'Bury Fair'. Shadwell was paid $22 in 1677 for publishing Newcastle's 'The Humorous Lovers', and after the duke's death in 1676 his son Henry, duke of Newcastle, continued the patronage. 
Shadwell's play 'The Royal Shepherdess' was performed for six days by the Duke's Company in February 1669; Pepys said there was nothing to admire in it but a 'good martial dance of pikemen' (Pepys, 9.459). In 1670 Shadwell's 'The Humourists' was severely censored before performance, and 'a numerous party' arrived to damn the play; the actors did not know their words properly and the play was only saved by the kind intervention of a dancer. About this time Shadwell wrote a play, 'The Hypocrite', which is now lost. His adaptation of Moliere's 'L'Avare', 'The Miser', was performed in 1672. His next play, his own personal favourite among his works and admired by critics and royalty, was 'Epsom-Wells' (1672). It was rumoured to have been written collaboratively with Sedley, who wrote the prologue. 
As a child, Shadwell's music master was John Jenkins, musician-in-ordinary to Charles I and Charles II, and Shadwell came to play a significant part in musical culture, working with several professional musicians, including Henry Purcell, and composing the music to at least seven theatre songs. John Dryden refers to a performance Shadwell gave on the Thames to entertain the 'royal barge', by singing and playing on the lute. It was probably Shadwell who revised the adaptation of Shakespeare's 'Tempest' by Dryden and William Davenant into a semi-opera, performed in 1674. With spectacular stage machinery, singing, and splendid dances, 'The Tempest, or, The Enchanted Island' was exceptionally popular and profitable. It set a fashion for operatic entertainments, such as Shadwell's own 'Psyche' (1675), which had music by Draghi and Matthew Locke. 'Psyche' integrated music and dancing into the drama in a way which proved formative for English opera. Shadwell produced for it the first dramatic musical score published in England, its preface proudly claiming he had 'some knowledge' of music, 'having been bred for many Years of [his] Youth to some Performance in it' ('Works', 2.280). 
In 1674 Shadwell joined Dryden and John Crowne in their 'Notes and Observations on 'The Empress of Morocco'', an attack on Elkanah Settle, who had insulted Dryden in the preface to his 'Empress of Morocco'. Written in three weeks, Shadwell's Don John play, 'The Libertine', was acted in June 1675. His excellent satire on the Royal Society, 'The Virtuoso', was first performed in May 1676 and remained popular for nearly thirty years. It represented Robert Hooke as Sir Nicholas Gimcrack, who demonstrates phosphorescence by reading a 'Geneva Bible' by the light of a leg of pork, and practises swimming without water, from a book on the subject. In the dedication Dryden is now attacked for 'feminine understanding' displayed by his fondness for repartee ('tattle') and dislike of Jonson. This was the immediate stimulus for Dryden's brilliant satire on Shadwell, 'MacFlecknoe'. It was the devastating culmination of a literary disagreement which had begun with Shadwell's 1668 preface to 'The Sullen Lovers' and was pursued through the prefaces of Shadwell's plays and the prologues and epilogues of Dryden's, despite their united attack on Settle in 1674. Shadwell favoured the comedy of humours over Dryden's wit-comedies, and thought Dryden's heroic tragedy ridiculous. He considered Jonson faultless, whereas Dryden thought him 'frugal' of wit. Shadwell thought comedy should have an instructive moral purpose, and not show indulgence towards aristocratic vices, whereas Dryden thought it should primarily entertain. Finally, they disagreed over the right of an author to borrow from other authors or the classics: what was imitation to Dryden was plagiarism to Shadwell. 

'MacFlecknoe' has been seen as 'a gauntlet thrown down by the leading professional of one faction', the tory poets led by Mulgrave, 'to the leading professional of another', the whig alliance (Love, 'Scribal Publication', 256). 'MacFlecknoe' was written in July-August 1676, and circulated in manuscript (published 1682). It represents the writer Richard Flecknoe as the emperor of Dullness, nominating Shadwell as his successor to the 'realms of nonsense' and the fittest of his sons to wage 'immortal war on wit', thereby lampooning Shadwell's claim to succession to the classical literary heritage and to be the true literary son of Ben Jonson. Shadwell's body -- for he resembled Jonson in being enormously fat -- 'fills the eye', and his coronation rites involve the presentation of a 'mighty mug of potent ale' and a crown of poppies, referring to his heavy drinking and opium addiction. In this mock-laureate, mock-occasional poem, Dryden makes brilliant play with images of laureate activity, attacking Shadwell as a possible rival. His clumsy dunce has come to define Shadwell to posterity. 
Shadwell revised Shakespeare's 'Timon of Athens' into 'The History of Timon of Athens the Man-hater', adding a love-interest, singing, and a masque of Cupid and Bacchus. First performed in early 1678, it set a fashion for adaptations of Shakespeare's tragedies. Shadwell's 'A True Widow', corrected by Sedley, was performed late in 1678, but was not successful, and he followed it with 'The Woman-Captain' in 1679. In September 1680 Shadwell helped John Aubrey to carry the coffin at Samuel Butler's quiet funeral. Butler had had some influence on 'The Virtuoso', and his jocular poem 'To Thomas' is probably addressed to Shadwell. It claims that while he used to be afflicted with 'claps', boozing has now made him so fat that sex is physically impossible. 
Shadwell was a member of the whig propaganda club the Green Ribbon Club, which he probably joined before November 1678. In 1681 Shadwell put on the whig polemic 'The Lancashire Witches' whose crude anti-Catholic satire was cut by the censor, though Shadwell later printed the uncut text. It features flying witches and the bigoted, superstitious, and ignorant Irish priest Teague O'Devilly, who proves to be complicit in the Popish Plot. Its consequence was the silencing of Shadwell as a playwright until 1688. In 1682 Shadwell, leading writer of the whigs, and Dryden, leading poet of the tories, clashed yet again, this time over politics, after Dryden published two anti-Shaftesbury poems, 'Absalom and Achitophel' (1681) and 'The Medal' (1682). In 'The Medal of John Bayes' (1682), almost certainly by Shadwell, the author lampoons Dryden as clumsy, 'lumpish', and a 'Hackney-rayler', and the tories as dangerous fools to deny the Popish Plot, while eulogizing Monmouth and Shaftesbury. Among the responses was the second part of 'Absalom and Achitophel', which contained lines by Dryden attacking Shadwell's poetry, his weight, and his habits. He was to be known by Dryden's nickname Og in satires thereafter. 
In 1688 Shadwell wrote the enormously successful play 'The Squire of Alsatia', which had an unbroken run of thirteen days. Shadwell received the astonishing sum of $130 for the benefit night, from which many had to be turned away. After the revolution of 1688 Dryden was deposed as poet laureate, and Dorset, as lord chamberlain, awarded the post, with that of historiographer royal, to Shadwell, who embarked on a series of tedious laureate poems. His enjoyable comedy 'Bury Fair' (1689) was followed by the less successful 'Amorous Bigotte' (1690), and 'The Scowrers' in late 1690 or early 1691. 
For at least four years Shadwell had suffered from gout, the pain of which he relieved with opium; he died from an overdose on 19 or 20 November 1692. He was buried on 24 November at St Luke's Church, Chelsea, and the funeral sermon was preached by Nicholas Brady. In his will, witnessed in 1690 in his Chelsea house, he left mourning rings to his brother, Dorset, Sedley, Edmund Ashton, and William Jephson. His wife, the major beneficiary and executor, inherited leases of two properties in Salisbury Court by the Dorset Garden theatre, rights to the rent for the theatre, and money, some of which was invested in property. She also inherited plate, goods, and chattels. Shadwell's play 'The Volunteers' was performed posthumously, and he was succeeded as poet laureate and historiographer royal by Nahum Tate. 
Sir John Shadwell published a collected edition of Shadwell's plays in 1720, prefaced with a biographical account of his father as a good patriot and subject, well educated, clever, and a wit. It concluded with Sir John's Latin memorial inscription. This was originally on Shadwell's monument in Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey, but had to be rewritten after complaints by certain clergymen that it included an 'Encomium' upon plays. Another son, 
For three centuries Shadwell was seen only as the clumsy dunce hack of Dryden's 'MacFlecknoe', unacceptably 'coarse', and of use only in furnishing details of interest to social historians. From the last years of the twentieth century Shadwell has begun to receive significant attention. New editions have been prepared of his plays, and 'The Virtuoso' was revived by the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1991. Scholarship has revealed Shadwell to be a central figure in our understanding of late seventeenth-century theatre, culture, and politics, and he has come into his own as a major Restoration playwright. John Aubrey's comment in 1680 that Shadwell 'is counted the best comedian we have now' ('Brief Lives', 2.226-7) deserves to be respected. 


@@@@@


doc= 25196


Shairp, John Campbell (1819-1885), literary scholar, was born in Houston, in the parish of Uphall, Linlithgowshire, on 30 July 1819, the third son in the family of eleven children of Norman Shairp (1779-1864), a major who had served in the infantry in the army of the Bengal presidency in India from 1799 to 1816, and of Elizabeth Binning Campbell (died 1853), daughter of John Campbell of Kildalloig, Argyll. 
After preliminary training by a tutor, a Mr Bell from Dumfriesshire, in the family home, Shairp was educated at Edinburgh Academy (1829-32), in George Ferguson's class, where he laid the basis of his scholarship. During 1835 he and his brother attended private classes in Edinburgh, where he was first introduced to the poetry of Wordsworth. From 1836 to 1839 he attended Glasgow University, where he excelled at logic and moral philosophy and was awarded prizes for logic, Greek, ethic (poetical composition), and humanity (translations from the Latin). He was part of a lively social community at Glasgow, centring on the Peel Club, which debated contemporary issues and included members such as Norman Macleod and Henry Douglas (who later became bishop of Bombay, and whose sister Shairp was to marry). In this circle he honed his skills as a public speaker, and developed his passion for literary criticism, especially the criticism of poetry. On leaving Glasgow, he spent a winter in Edinburgh, before moving to Oxford in April 1840, where he won the Snell exhibition to Balliol. Here he attended lectures in logic and moral philosophy, in addition to classics and speculative philosophy. He once more found a lively circle of friends among the brightest undergraduates, which included the poet Arthur Hugh Clough, John Duke Coleridge, and Arthur Stanley (later to be dean of Westminster); much of this period in his life he later chronicled in his poem 'Balliol scholars: a remembrance (1840-43)', published in 'Macmillan's Magazine'. During this period at Oxford he became deeply impressed by the leading figures of the Oxford Movement -- which was then at its height -- especially John Henry Newman and John Keble, although his own religious convictions retained their attachment to the theology of the Church of Scotland. The influence of Matthew Arnold also came to be felt by Shairp during his period at Oxford, and Shairp later admitted that Arnold and Newman were the two biggest influences on his intellectual and religious character. In 1842 he won the Newdigate prize with a poem on Charles XII of Sweden, and it became his first publication. He took his degree in Easter 1844, and unsuccessfully attempted to gain a fellowship at Oriel. 
In 1846 Shairp was offered a mastership at Rugby School by A. C. Tait, his former tutor at Balliol, and he remained there until 1857. Although he enjoyed his time at Rugby, with its exceptionally high teaching standards, and where he mixed school lessons with tutoring private pupils, his nationalist feelings were awoken, and he spent several years trying to find a position in his native Scotland. On 23 June 1853 he married Eliza Douglas at Bute House, Petersham, and they had two sons, the first of whom, Norman ('b'. 1855), died in infancy, and the second of whom, John Campbell ('b'. 1858), was to become advocate and sheriff substitute of Argyll at Inveraray. In November 1856 Shairp took leave of absence from Rugby to teach Professor Lushington's class at Glasgow University. Soon afterward, however, he secured the position of assistant to the professor of Latin at the United College of St Salvator and St Leonard at St Andrews University. His initial stipend was so low that he was forced to take private pupils, a situation which was resolved in 1861 when he was appointed to the professorship. He made a number of close friendships during this period, particularly with the philosopher John Veitch. 
Shairp began to publish regularly from this point on, with articles appearing in 'Good Words' and the 'North British Review'. Although he had published his introductory lecture at St Andrews as 'The Uses of the Study of Latin Literature' (1858), his first major publication was 'Kilmahoe: a Highland Pastoral' which 'The Scotsman' viewed favourably, describing it as a 'spring of genuine poetry' (Knight, 234). In 1866 Shairp was unsuccessful in his candidature for the chair of ethics at Glasgow, but continued to publish, with his 'John Keble: an Essay' (1866), and his important collection of essays and articles, 'Studies in Poetry and Philosophy' (1868). During this latter year he was appointed by the crown to the principalship of the United College at St Andrews, and as a result also took on a large number of administrative duties as a member of the university court. He later became closely involved with the establishment of a college at Dundee (later to become Dundee University). 
A steady stream of publications flowed from Shairp's pen during this period: numerous articles in journals such as 'Macmillan's Magazine', and another volume of essays, entitled 'Culture and Religion' (1870), which became an instant success, reaching a third edition by 1872, the same year in which his 'Studies in Poetry and Philosophy' reached its second. Between 1872 and 1873 Shairp masterminded the publication of 'The Life and Letters of J. D. Forbes', his great friend and fellow academic at St Andrews. The volume was eventually published by Macmillan in 1873, after a prolonged and tortuous editing process. In the following year his edition of Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections of a Tour Made in Scotland in AD 1803' further demonstrated his powers as a literary critic, as well as his deep admiration for Wordsworth. 
In June 1877 Shairp was elected professor of poetry at Oxford, and awarded the degree of MA. His candidature had been supported by his old mentor, Matthew Arnold. In 1879 his book on Burns, published in the 'English Men of Letters' series, received mixed reviews. His first lectures at Oxford disappointed many, but were published as 'Aspects of Poetry' (1881). He held the post jointly with the principalship at St Andrews until his death. The University of Edinburgh honoured him with the degree of doctor of laws in 1884. 
Shairp enjoyed walking, especially in the highlands of Scotland, and in the countryside surrounding Yarrow in the borders. It was the Scottish landscape which inspired him to take up poetry. His other passion was for riding, and in particular, hunting. From about 1880, however, his health began to fail, and he eventually died of heart disease at Ormsary House, Ormsary, Argyll, on 18 September 1885. He was buried in the ancestral vault at Houston. 


@@@@@


doc= 25197


Shakerley, Jeremy (1626-1653?), astronomer, was born and baptized at Halifax, Yorkshire, in early November 1626, the son of William Shakerley and his wife, Judith Brig. His parents had married at Halifax on 7 February of that year; as Brig is also written in the registers as Brigge or Briggs, Jeremy could probably claim kinship with the mathematician Henry Briggs of Halifax. He records that he 'was brought up at a Free Schoole, and by the mediation of the Schoolemaster... went into Ireland continuing there until the Rebellion begun there, and then returning to my native place', and that from early 1647 he 'gave my mind to the Mathematicks' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 243, fol. 117r). His correspondence with the astrologer William Lilly between January 1648 and March 1650 reveals that he was then living at Carr Hall, near Wheatley Lane, Pendle Forest, Lancashire, the home of the antiquarian Christopher Towneley, 'from whom meat and drinke is all I can expect' (ibid.). 
Shakerley thus looked to Lilly to advance his career. He seems genuinely to have shared Lilly's enthusiasm for reforming astrology with the aid of modern astronomy; when another correspondent submitted a problem to his judgement, he declared that without such reform no reliable guidance could be provided. Concerns he mentioned to Lilly included predicting eclipses, translating the third book of Ptolemy, acting as amanuensis to the astrologer John Stephenson, for whom he calculated an ephemeris from Kepler's tables, and conversing with the mathematically minded Nathan Pighells. He composed annual almanacs, one of which was published as 'Synopsis compendiariae, or, A Brief Description... MDCLI' (1651). 
In February 1649 Shakerley announced that he would 'performe something against Wing' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 243, fol. 117'r'). The result was 'The anatomy of Urania practica:... laying open the errors and impertinencies delivered... by Mr Vincent Wing, and Mr William Leybourne, under the title of Urania practica' (1649). In this he argued that papers of the late Jeremy Horrocks (available to him through Towneley) provided a better basis than Wing's for astronomical calculations, especially in lunar theory. Wing replied in 'Ens fictum Shakerlaei, or, The Annihilation of Mr Jeremie Shakerley' (1649). The dispute evidently worried Lilly, who had suggested the production of planetary tables in English but now declined to act as their patron. Shakerley records this in a letter of March 1650, and goes on: 'you taxe my tables for being the same with those of Jonas Moore... I make no doubt to cleare my selfe from your suspition of conspiring with Moore against you'; he concluded that 'now you have rid your selfe of mee, you need not long be separated from the friendship of Mr Wing and Mr Leybourne' (ibid., fol. 128'r'). Here the correspondence ends. Shakerley's tables were published by Robert and William Leybourne as 'Tabulae Britannicae: the British Tables' (1653), with a subtitle offering 'logistical arithmetic, the doctrine of the sphere', material on chronology, the calendar, and time, and 'the calculation of the motions of the fixed and wandering stars, and the eclipses of the luminaries. Calculated... from the hypothesis of Bullialdus and the observations of Mr Horrox'. If the volume had any significant influence it was as a source of information about Horrocks's work. 
Meanwhile Shakerley had sailed for the Far East, apparently under the auspices of the East India Company. One of his aims was to view a transit of Mercury predicted for 1651; an equivalent observation had been made only once before. A letter of 15 January 1653, addressed to Henry Osborne from Surat, on the north-west coast of India, shows that he successfully observed the transit, made other observations, and planned to collect records of Indian astronomy. He is believed to have died soon afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 25198


Shakespear, John (1774-1858), orientalist, born at Lount, near Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, in August 1774, was the son of a small farmer. He was educated at the parish school at Staunton Harold, and afterwards at a school kept by a clergyman, who brought him to the notice of Francis Rawdon Hastings, Lord Rawdon, the lord of the manor. Lord Rawdon, who was contemplating a mission to north Africa, sent Shakespear to learn Arabic in London. In 1793 Lord Rawdon obtained for him a post in the commissariat of a force under his command, which was sent in aid of the royalist insurgents in Brittany but which returned without having achieved anything. 
About 1805 Shakespear was appointed to an oriental professorship at the Royal Military College, Marlow. When the East India Company opened its college at Addiscombe in 1809, he was appointed professor of Hindustani. While there he compiled a Hindustani grammar (1813) and dictionary (1817), and various textbooks. Of the first edition of his dictionary he said that it was little more than a revision of one published in Calcutta by William Hunter, but subsequent editions contained the results of his own scholarship. In 1829 he retired from the East India Company's service with a pension. Being frugal he put by a considerable part of his salary and, with the large sums from the sale of his books, he was able on his retirement to buy Langley Priory, near Ashby-de-la-Zouch, thereby fulfilling, it was said, the ambition of his boyhood. 
In 1856 Shakespear gave $2500 to the trustees of the fund for preserving William Shakespeare's house at Stratford upon Avon, prompted apparently by the idea that he might have been descended from a branch of the dramatist's family. In his will (which was proved at under $18,000 in 1860) he bequeathed a further sum to the fund but the court of chancery pronounced the bequest invalid. He died at Langley Priory on 10 June 1858, unmarried, the estate passing to his nephew, Charles Bowles, who had followed his uncle and become professor of Hindustani at Addiscombe, and who took the surname of Shakespear. 


@@@@@


doc= 25199


Shakespear, Sir Richmond Campbell (1812-1861), army and political officer in India, youngest son of John Talbot Shakespear, of the Bengal civil service, and Emily (eldest daughter of William Makepeace Thackeray of the Bengal civil service and his wife, Amelia Richmond Webb), was born in India on 11 May 1812, and baptized at Krishnagar on 13 April 1813. He came to England with his first cousin, William Makepeace Thackeray, and was with him at a preparatory school -- ruled, according to Thackeray, 'by a horrible little tyrant' -- and at Charterhouse. After attending Addiscombe College (1827-8) he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Bengal artillery on 12 June 1828. He arrived in India on 10 February 1829 and served at various stations in Bengal until 19 January 1837, when he was appointed assistant in the revenue department and stationed at Gorakhpur. 
On 25 September 1838 he joined at Delhi the 6th light field (camel) battery of nine-pounders under Captain Augustus Abbott, and, leaving Delhi on 4 November, marched in the army of the Indus under Major-General Sir Willoughby Cotton and Lieutenant-General Sir John Keane, to Kandahar, arriving in April 1839. He took part in the expedition to Girishk under Sir Robert Sale, returning to Kandahar on 29 May. Like other British officers, he distrusted Shah Shuja. 
On 21 June, Shakespear was appointed political assistant in the mission to Herat of Major d'Arcy Todd, the newly appointed envoy to Shah Kamran. Shakespear's special duty was to train the troops at Herat in gunnery and drill. Towards the end of 1839 a Russian expedition under General Perovsky left Orenburg for Khiva; fearing Russian penetration in central Asia, Todd sent Captain James Abbott to persuade the khan of Khiva to release Russian captives sold into slavery, thereby depriving Perovsky of his 'casus belli'. Abbott was unsuccessful in his mission but appalling winter weather conditions compelled Perovsky to abandon his march to Khiva. 
Todd, without news from Abbott, dispatched Shakespear to Khiva on a similar mission. With an escort of eleven picked Heratis he left Herat on 14 May 1840, covering the 433 miles to Khiva by horse and camel by 12 June. He negotiated with the khan of Khiva, and meanwhile proposed to his own superiors a 'de facto' British protectorate over Khiva, supporting it by officers and money. Exceeding his instructions and offering the khan a future alliance with Britain, Shakespear persuaded the khan to release the Russian slaves into his care -- 416 in all, including 18 women and 11 children. With a Khivan escort, Shakespear led them across the desert to Fort Aleksandrovsk on the Caspian and thence to Orenburg on 1 October, where he was received with acclamation. Having delivered his charges he travelled to St Petersburg, arriving on 3 November 1840. He was feted and was cordially received by the tsar. From St Petersburg, Shakespear carried dispatches to London. On 31 August 1841 he was knighted. He published 'A journey from Herat to Orenburg' in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' (June 1846). 
Shakespear returned to India in 1841. On 3 January 1842 he was appointed military secretary to Major-General George Pollock, commanding the force assembled at Peshawar for the relief of Sir Robert Sale at Jalalabad. He reached Peshawar on 5 February and remained there for two months while the column was organized and reinforcements were brought up. On 31 March he accompanied Pollock to Jamrud, and on 5 April entered the Khyber Pass. He volunteered to accompany Lieutenant-Colonel Taylor as his aide-de-camp in his attack on the heights on the right, and took command of the men who had recently formed the garrison of Ali Masjid, for which he was mentioned in dispatches. He again distinguished himself at Mamu Khel on 24 August, at Jagdalak on 8 September, and at Tezin on 12 and 13 September, and was again mentioned in dispatches. On arrival at Kabul on 15 September he volunteered to accompany 600 Kuzzilbash horsemen to rescue the British captives held by the Afghans at Bamian. The captives, by the exertions of Eldred Pottinger and by liberal bribery, had already effected their own release, but Shakespear, meeting them on 17 September at the foot of the Kalu Pass, escorted them through the disturbed country until, on 20 September, they met Sale's troops. Shakespear arrived at Kabul with the captives on 22 September. In October and November he accompanied Pollock on his return march to India, crossing the Sutlej at Ferozepore on 19 December. 
On 28 March 1843 Shakespear was appointed deputy commissioner of Saugor. He was promoted brevet captain on 12 June. In October he was transferred to Gwalior as assistant to Lieutenant-Colonel Sleeman, political agent in Sindhia's dominions, and took part in the war against the Maratha forces, which was considered necessary to establish the government at Gwalior on a firm foundation. He was aide-de-camp to Sir Hugh Gough at the battle of Maharajpur on 29 December 1843. After this he was employed in getting possession of Gwalior Fort and in disbanding the durbar troops. On return to civil duties he remained in political charge of Gwalior until June 1848. During his service at Gwalior, Shakespear married (at Agra), on 5 March 1844, Marion Sophia, third daughter of George Powney Thompson of the Bengal civil service and his wife, Harriet. Lady Shakespear, three sons, and six daughters survived Shakespear, and she died at Bournemouth on 16 December 1899. On 1 May 1846 he was promoted to be regimental captain. 
In 1848 sickness compelled Shakespear to go to the hills on leave; but on the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Sikh War he returned to military duty on 20 October. Joining at Ferozepore the army of the Punjab under Sir Hugh Gough, he was present at the action of Ramnagar on 22 November. On 1 December he was promoted to brevet major. On 3 December he was in the action of Sadulapur or passage of the Chenab, and on 13 January 1849 he commanded his battery of six heavy guns at the battle of Chilianwala and was mentioned in dispatches. At the battle of Gujrat on 21 February 1849 Shakespear again commanded his heavy-gun battery. The battle opened with a three hours' bombardment by the British at a range of 1500 yards and at the rate of forty rounds per gun per hour. After this the artillery advanced with exceptional speed, taking up forward positions and steadily driving the enemy back. Shakespear was wounded and was invalided to the hills. He was thanked in dispatches, and on 7 June he was promoted to brevet lieutenant-colonel. 
Shakespear returned to civil employment at Gwalior towards the end of 1849. In 1851 he was transferred to the political agency at Jodhpur. He was gazetted to be resident in Nepal in 1853, but did not take this up as the post did not become vacant. He was promoted to brevet colonel in the army on 28 November 1854. In 1857 he was appointed resident at Baroda, and, in February 1858, political commissioner of the district, and received acting command of the northern division of the Bombay army, in addition to his political duties, with the rank of brigadier-general. He was promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel on 27 August 1858. 
In July 1859 Shakespear became agent to the governor-general for central India, residing at Indore. He conducted that year negotiations with the begums of Bhopal and installed Sikandar Begam as rani of Bhopal. For his tact in extricating the government from an embarrassing position he was commended by the governor-general in council. He was made CB, civil division, in 1860, and later in the same year (30 December) Lord Canning, in a dispatch to the home government, expressed his high appreciation of Shakespear's conduct of the negotiations with Sindhia. Shakespear had accepted the post of chief commissioner of Mysore and Coorg, and was preparing to take up the appointment when he died of bronchitis on 29 October 1861 at Indore, and was buried at the old cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 25200


Shakespeare, William (1564-1616), playwright and poet, was baptized, probably by the parish priest, John Bretchgirdle (or Bracegirdle), in Holy Trinity, the parish church of Stratford upon Avon, on 26 April 1564, the third child of John Shakespeare (died 1601) ['see below'] and Mary Arden (died 1608). It seems appropriate that the first of many gaps in the records of Shakespeare's life should be the exact date of his birth, though that is a common problem for the period. He was probably born on 21, 22, or 23 April 1564, given the 1559 prayer book's instructions to parents on the subject of baptisms. But, ever since Joseph Greene, an eighteenth-century Stratford curate, informed the scholar George Steevens that Shakespeare was born on 23 April, with no apparent evidence for his assertion, and Steevens adopted that date in his 1773 edition of Shakespeare, it has been usual to assume that Shakespeare was born on St George's day, so that England's patron saint and the birth of the 'national poet' can be celebrated on the same day. Where he was born is clearer: in 1564 his parents appear to have been living in Henley Street, probably in part of the building now known as Shakespeare's Birthplace but, equally probably, not in that part of the building in which the room traditionally known as the place of Shakespeare's birth is located. The accretion of myth and commerce around Shakespeare's biography and its material legacy produces such paradoxes. 
Richard Shakespeare, a husbandman and probably John's father, had settled in Snitterfield near Stratford by 1529 and had died by February 1561, leaving property that he rented from Robert Arden of Wilmcote. Robert Arden was a member of the younger branch of the powerful Arden family; his father, Thomas Arden, lived at Wilmcote and passed lands, probably quite extensive, to his son. Robert married twice: with his first wife, Agnes Hill, 'nee' Webbe, he had at least eight children, all girls, the youngest of whom was Mary; there appear to have been no children from the second marriage, though there were stepchildren. 
The two families, Ardens and Shakespeares, were linked by Richard Shakespeare's tenancy from Robert Arden. But 
John and Mary Shakespeare were probably married in Aston Cantlow, the parish church for Wilmcote and the place where Robert Arden wanted to be buried. The exact date of the wedding is unknown but their first child, Joan, was born in September 1558 (and may well have died in infancy); Margaret was baptized in December 1562 and was buried the following April. A year later William was born. He survived the devastating plague that killed one in eight of the town's population later the same year. There were five more children: Gilbert (1566-1612), another Joan (born 1569, indicating that John and Mary's first child must have died by that year; she was the only sibling to outlive William, dying in 1646), Anne (1571-1579), Richard (1574-1613), and Edmund (1580-1607). All but Anne lived to adulthood. William's childhood was thus spent in a steadily increasing family and there were other relatives nearby: his uncle Henry Shakespeare, John's brother, lived in Snitterfield and many of his mother's sisters married local men. 
John Shakespeare bought more property in Stratford in 1575, almost certainly including the rest of the 'Birthplace', creating a substantial house which even though it incorporated space for his workshop amounted to a fine home for his expanding family. But this period was also one of ever-increasing civic importance for John Shakespeare. He had risen through the lesser offices of the borough and, by the time of William's birth, was one of the fourteen burgesses of Stratford. In 1565 he became an alderman and in 1568 was elected bailiff for the year, the highest office in the town. In 1571 he became chief alderman and deputy bailiff. At about this time he also seems to have applied for a coat of arms. The family's wealth was also growing and the civic importance and high social standing that John Shakespeare had achieved in a brief period provided the context for William's upbringing. 
But in the following years something seems to have gone wrong with John Shakespeare's finances. At the start of the 1570s he was stretching his commercial activities beyond his trade, dealing illegally in wool and also being prosecuted for usury. By the end of the decade he was in debt; in 1578 he mortgaged some of Mary's inheritance and lost it in 1580 when he could not repay the sum, land that would otherwise have been inherited by William in due course. He stopped attending council meetings after 1576 as well, and was replaced as an alderman in 1586. All of this too provided a family context for William's youth; the decline in John Shakespeare's fortunes cannot have been unaccompanied by anxiety. 
In 1592 John was listed by the presenters for the parish of Stratford upon Avon as an obstinate recusant, among nine on the list whose absence was identified by the presenters and by the commissioners to whom they reported as being 'for feare of processe for Debtte' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 39). There is no self-evident reason to distrust this statement, though it has been seen as an excuse to cover secret Catholicism. Certainly some Catholics feigned debt as a reason for recusancy but John Shakespeare's debts seem real enough. 
In 1790 a bricklayer was reported as having found in 1757 in the roof of the Henley Street house a manuscript now known as John Shakespeare's spiritual testament. Blank copies of this formulaic document, based on one written by Cardinal Borromeo, are claimed to have been circulated in large numbers by Catholic missionaries; this copy was said to have been completed by or on behalf of John Shakespeare. Transcribed by the great Shakespeare scholar Edmond Malone, who later came to doubt its authenticity, it is now lost and its link to John Jordan, a Stratford man well known for inventing materials to satisfy the increasing thirst for Shakespeariana, puts it under suspicion. In the unlikely event that it was genuine it would suggest that John Shakespeare was a Catholic still holding to his original faith and that William was brought up in a household where the double standards of adequate outward observance of protestant orthodoxy and private heterodoxy were largely achieved. There is, of course, no reason to assume that the adult William shared his father's religious views, and the evidence for John's being a Catholic is very far from decisive. It was, after all, during John Shakespeare's time as bailiff in 1568 that the images of the last judgment that decorated the guild chapel in Stratford were whitewashed and defaced as no longer acceptable to state protestantism, though this might simply have been a further example of John's outward conformism. 
In any case, another event during John Shakespeare's tenure as bailiff seems more significant for his son's future career: the visit to Stratford of two theatre companies, the Queen's Players and Worcester's Men, the first time theatre companies are known to have played in Stratford. Since the first performance in any town was usually in front of the town officials, John Shakespeare would have seen the performances and William might well have accompanied him (as other children certainly did in similar circumstances). Further visits followed: Leicester's Men in 1572 and 1576, Warwick's Men in 1574, Worcester's Men in 1574 and 1581, Lord Strange's Men in 1578, Essex's Men in 1578 and 1583, Derby's Men in 1579, Lord Berkeley's Men in 1580 and 1582. Across the period when William was likely to have been continuously resident in Stratford, there were at least thirteen visits by companies of players, bringing a fairly wide repertory of drama, little of which can be confidently identified. None the less, there is a context there for William Shakespeare's early learning about theatre performance and contemporary drama in the work of such professional companies. He might, too, have travelled nearby to see the spectacular entertainments at Kenilworth given by the earl of Leicester for the queen in 1575, or the magnificent cycle drama of mystery plays which was still performed annually at Coventry until 1578, or Coventry's Hocktide play (suppressed in 1568 but performed again at Kenilworth in 1575), or the amateur performances which regularly occurred in Stratford. 
Shakespeare would also have acted, as part of his education, either in Latin plays or in oratorical declamation, the latter a crucial part of the performative training in classical rhetoric. William's own education was not likely to have been affected by his father's fluctuating fortunes. It was also probably far better than either of his parents had received. There is no evidence that either John or Mary Shakespeare could write: each signed with a kind of mark. But the marks were not the awkward crosses of the totally illiterate: John often drew a fine pair of compasses; Mary's mark in 1579 was a complex design, apparently incorporating her initials and fluently written. Both may well have been able to read: many who could not write could read. Certainly, given John's status in the community, his four sons would have gone to Stratford's grammar school where their education would have been free. Before that William would have attended 'petty school' from about the age of five to about seven, learning to read. 
At the King's New School, Stratford's splendid grammar school, William would have learned an immense amount of Latin literature and history, perhaps using the Latin-English dictionary left to the school by John Bretchgirdle who had baptized him. Among the works that Shakespeare later used as sources for his plays are a number that he would have read as part of his grammar-school education: the history of Livy, the speeches of Cicero, the comedies of Plautus and Terence, the tragedies of Seneca, and the poetry of Virgil and, above all, Ovid, who remained his favourite poet. The range of Latin writing that formed the curriculum was, by modern standards, vast. The mode of teaching, by a good teacher assisted by an usher, was one calculated to ensure the arts of memory, facility in composition, and rhetorical skills. 
In addition, regular attendance at church, a legal requirement which his father does not appear to have avoided until later, guaranteed prolonged exposure to the 'Book of Homilies' (fairly dull), the 'Book of Common Prayer' (rather more exciting), and, especially, the exhilarating language of the 'Bible' in English, a resource that Shakespeare, like his contemporaries, knew well, used extensively, and embedded deeply into the fabric of his language. 
Leaving school at about fifteen, Shakespeare would have had a series of options open. He might have gone into his father's trade as an apprentice and there is anecdotal evidence to that effect recorded by John Aubrey in the late seventeenth century, also noting that 'when he kill'd a Calfe, he would doe it in a 'high style', & make a Speech' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 58), though, since John Shakespeare's trade did not involve slaughtering, this could possibly refer to William's acting in a mumming play or Whitsun 'pastime' of the kind the town council paid for in 1583 -- pretending to kill a calf was a trick often included in such plays. 
John Aubrey's conversation with William Beeston, son of Christopher who had worked with Shakespeare later in the Lord Chamberlain's Men, produced the snippet of information that Shakespeare 'had been in his younger yeares a Schoolmaster in the Countrey' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 59). The theory is not impossible and has gained ground in the wake of the re-examination of the evidence surrounding the mention in 1581 of a 'William Shakeshafte' in the will of Alexander de Hoghton of Lea Hall in Lancashire, encouraging Sir Thomas Hesketh to take on Shakeshaft as a servant. Shakeshaft was a common name in Lancashire, not least in the area surrounding the Hoghton family estates, and an extremely uncommon one in Warwickshire; none of the many variant spellings of William Shakespeare's own name even begins to approximate to Shakeshaft. 
John Cottom, who was the teacher at Stratford grammar school from 1579 to 1581 and hence during or just after Shakespeare's last year at school, then returned to his family in Lancashire; his younger brother was a Catholic priest who was tried with Edmund Campion and executed in 1582. Perhaps, the theory runs, Cottom encouraged Shakespeare, as a member of a recusant Catholic family, to be a schoolteacher in a staunchly Catholic household in the north of England. The evidence is purely circumstantial and the crucial evidence, the mention of William Shakeshaft, is insufficient for proof. In any case, Shakespeare was rather less qualified to be a schoolmaster than any of the Stratford teachers he had studied under. 
One advantage of the theory is that it suggests a route for Shakespeare to move to London since there were links between Hesketh and Hoghton and Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange (later earl of Derby), whose company of players might well have included Shakespeare but was more certainly the troupe that acted a number of Shakespeare's early plays. 
But there is no reason to posit a direct link for Shakespeare between Lancashire and London, if he was ever in Lancashire at all, since by 1582 he was certainly back in Stratford. On 27 November a marriage licence was issued for Shakespeare's marriage to 
Anne (whose name also appears as Agnes) was the eldest of Richard's seven children (three with his first wife and four with his second); William may have been a minor, distinctly young for marriage at this time, but Anne was of a normal marrying age. The Shakespeares and Hathaways knew each other: John Shakespeare had acted as surety for Richard Hathaway and twice paid his debts. Whatever the nature of William's relationship with Anne may have been -- and biographers and novelists have frequently speculated about it -- by the end of summer 1582 Anne was pregnant and the marriage in November was performed after only a single reading of the banns, rather than the more normal three, presumably in order to speed up the process. The vicar who officiated at Temple Grafton, if that was indeed where they married, was John Frith, known for his ability to cure hawks but also 'Unsound in religion', according to a survey in 1586 of the Warwickshire clergy, again a possible indication of Shakespeare's Catholicism (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 71). 
It is reasonable to give in to temptation and assign Shakespeare's 'Sonnet 145' to this period, making it Shakespeare's earliest extant work: its final couplet puns on Hathaway (''I hate' from hate away she threw, / And saved my life, saying 'not you.'' 'Sonnet 145', ll. 13-14) and its octosyllabics, unusual in the sonnets, suggest that it may not have been part of the sequence originally. There is no especial reason why a man should write a love poem to a woman only at the beginning of their relationship and the poem need not relate to any actual moment in the history of William and Anne. But, if it were written at the time of the event it appears to describe, then its description of courtship rather than marriage would date it to the early 1580s. 
Six months after the marriage, on 26 May 1583, Susanna Shakespeare was baptized, followed on 2 February 1585 by William's and Anne's twins, Hamnet and Judith, probably named after Hamnet and Judith Sadler. Hamnet Sadler, a local baker, was in 1616 one of the witnesses of Shakespeare's will, and his name also appears in local records as Hamlet. With these three children Shakespeare's family seems to have been complete: there are no records of further children. Some have used this as evidence that the marriage was distant or unhappy, though many happily married couples both then and later have had no children at all and it is perhaps relevant that Susanna and Judith had few children (one and three respectively). 
From 1585 to 1592 the records of Shakespeare's life are almost silent. He is briefly referred to in records concerning the attempts of his parents to retrieve property in Wilmcote, part of what had been Mary's inheritance and should have been passed on to William, land that had been mortgaged and was now lost, another indication of John's financial troubles. But the reference does not indicate his presence in Stratford. Biographers have created fanciful narratives for this period; none have any foundation. Perhaps this was when he was 'a Schoolmaster in the Countrey'. The traditional explanation, first set out by Nicholas Rowe in his biographical sketch prefixed to his 1709 edition of Shakespeare's plays, was that William poached deer from Sir Thomas Lucy's estate at Charlecote, was caught and prosecuted, wrote a ballad against Lucy, and was forced to escape to London to avoid further prosecution. Shakespeare's apparent jibe at the Lucy coat of arms in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' (I.i, ll. 13-20) has been explained as belated revenge, though why Shakespeare waited so long and revenged himself so obscurely is not adequately justified. 
The next print reference to Shakespeare is in 'Greenes Groats-Worth of Witte' (1592), a pamphlet ostensibly by Robert Greene (though possibly written by someone else, probably Henry Chettle) and published after Greene's death in September 1592; the pamphlet attacks Shakespeare as: 'an upstart Crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his 'Tygers hart wrapt in a Players hyde', supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blanke verse as the best of you: and beeing an absolute 'Iohannes fac totum', is in his owne conceit the onely Shake-scene in a countrey. ('Greenes Groats-Worth of Witte', 1592, sig. F1'r')' The passage transforms the Duke of York's vicious attack on the even more vicious Queen Margaret in '3 Henry VI': 'O tiger's heart wrapped in a woman's hide!' (I.iv, l. 138). 
Whatever else Shakespeare may have been doing between 1585 and 1592 it is clear that he had been and was still an actor, that he had now become a playwright, and that, whatever other jobs this jack of all trades ('Iohannes fac totum') was doing in the theatre, he had become well enough known to irritate Robert Greene or whoever wrote the pamphlet. The attack was so sharp that Henry Chettle, who had been responsible for its publication, is often thought to be apologizing to Shakespeare later that year in his 'Kind-Hartes Dreame' for not having 'moderated the heate' in preparing the piece for the press, praising Shakespeare for as 'divers of worship have reported, his uprightnes of dealing, which argues his honesty, and his fa[ce]tious grace in writting, which aprooves his Art' (H. Chettle, 'Kind-Hartes Dreame', 1592, sigs. A3'v'-4'r'), though the passage is probably an apology to someone other than Shakespeare. 
Neither at this period nor later is there any firm evidence of the roles Shakespeare acted or of the quality of his performances. Anecdotes ascribe to him various roles in his own plays, for example Adam in 'As You Like It', a choice which does not suggest any especially great thespian talent. He is named first in the list of 'the Principall Actors in all these Playes' in the collection of his own works in 1623 and appears in the lists of actors in Ben Jonson's 'Workes' (1616) for 'Every Man in his Humour' ('first Acted, in the yeere 1598') and 'Sejanus his Fall' (1603). However much or little he may have acted, it is significant that he was known as a player, for example in the sneer by Ralph Brooke, the York herald, in 1602 at the grant of arms to 'Shakespear the Player' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 172). 
When Shakespeare became a player is not clear but it is at least possible that he joined the Queen's Men. They played in Stratford in 1587 and their repertory included a play based on Montemayor's 'Diana' (the source for Shakespeare's 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona'), anonymous plays on the reigns of King John ('The Troublesome Reign'), Richard III ('The True Tragedy'), Henry IV, and Henry V (both covered by 'The Famous Victories of Henry V'), all subjects of plays by Shakespeare himself in the 1590s, as well as 'King Leir' which, as well as being the major source for Shakespeare's 'King Lear', has possibly left its trace on a number of his earlier works. Though he was influenced by many other plays, not least the work of Christopher Marlowe, in developing his own style in his early works, there is no comparable body of sustained influence. If not actually in the Queen's Men, he certainly seems to have known their work especially well and the plays that belonged to them were crucial to Shakespeare's histories, the works that established the Lord Chamberlain's Men as the pre-eminent company of the age. The Queen's Men's works were virulently anti-Catholic and the company may even have owed its existence to a political aim of touring anti-Catholic propaganda; Shakespeare's plays that owe something of their existence to the Queen's Men's repertory, while hardly being Catholic apologetics, are strikingly less factional in their religion. The idea that Shakespeare joined the company in 1587 after one of their actors, William Knell, died in a fight in Thame, Oxfordshire, is no more improbable than the deer-poaching narrative. 
Determining what Shakespeare had done to warrant the attack in 'Greenes Groats-Worth of Witte' is exceptionally difficult. The dating of Shakespeare's works is often opaque and the early plays pose especial problems. Some scholars argue for the plays to have been written both earlier and in a radically different order from the conventionally accepted sequence. Each reordering produces a new narrative for Shakespeare's contact with other plays and other dramatists, his reading, and his development as a dramatist. While there is uncertainty for the dating of the early plays there is equal uncertainty over authorship. Collaboration was common for playwrights generating drama at high speed to satisfy the appetite of the theatre companies and their customers. The evidence of Philip Henslowe's accounts shows that a minority of plays had a single author, at least for the repertory performed by the companies to which these records relate. If arguments for collaboration in plays in the Shakespeare canon are no longer based solely on a notion of quality (that which is good is by Shakespeare, that which is bad is by a collaborator), the evidence derived from analysis of the plays themselves -- their technique, staging, use of rhyme, rare words, common words, feminine endings in blank verse, and other tests -- is not susceptible to final verification. 
By the time Shakespeare was attacked for his arrogance in being a playwright in 1592, he had certainly written '3 Henry VI'. The other two parts of his exploration of the reign of Henry VI had also been performed. 'Part 2', originally published in 1594 as 'The First Part of the Contention betwixt the Two Famous Houses of York and Lancaster', may have been the first to be performed. It is likely that 'Part 3', published in 1595 as 'The True Tragedy of Richard Duke of York', was next to be written and performed and that 'Part 1' was the new play called 'Harey the vj' that Henslowe recorded as performed by Lord Strange's Men at the Rose Theatre on 3 March 1592. 
The decision to write plays on English history was a response to the current popularity of such drama. The idea of a two-part play was probably a response to the phenomenal success of Marlowe's 'Tamburlaine', though there were many other two-part plays. There are strong indications, not least in the title by which '2 Henry VI' was first known, that Shakespeare had mapped out the drama as at least a two-part exploration of a catastrophic period of English history. But his decision to create a three-part work was an innovation. Shakespeare's first investigation of English history generated a work on a scale that had no dramatic precedent in the professional theatre. Its nearest analogy was the biblical cycle-drama, the 'mystery' plays which were still being performed in his boyhood. But the move from sacred to secular also produced a form of theatrical analogue to the chronicle histories, the massive prose narratives out of which Shakespeare constructed his plays, particularly Edward Halle's 'The Union of the Two Noble and Illustre Families of Lancaster and York' (1548) and Raphael Holinshed's 'The Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland' of which Shakespeare used the second edition of 1587. He read other chronicles as well, implying the availability to him of a substantial library, and these plays show the first small traces of his use of works that he would return to for local and general inspiration throughout his career: Apuleius's 'The Golden Ass' in Adlington's 1566 translation and Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' in Arthur Golding's version completed in 1567. 

'1 Henry VI' in particular was an immediate success. In 1592 Thomas Nashe wondered in 'Pierce Penilesse': 'How would it have joyed brave 'Talbot' (the terror of the French) to thinke... hee should triumphe againe on the Stage, and have his bones newe embalmed with the teares of ten thousand spectators at least, (at severall times) who, in the Tragedian that represents his person, imagine they behold him fresh bleeding. (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 120)' Nashe's praise might be exaggerated, not least by the likelihood that he co-wrote 'Part 1'. It looks as though Shakespeare himself wrote only a comparatively small part of 'Part 1' and that Nashe and at least two other dramatists had their hands in it. But the three plays that make up 'Henry VI' established Shakespeare as a powerful and popular dramatist. 
It is likely that Greene (or whoever wrote the pamphlet) could also have been responding to Shakespeare's first comedies, for 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona' and 'The Taming of the Shrew' were probably also written at this time. The theatres were closed because of the plague for almost the whole period between June 1592 and June 1594, interrupting Shakespeare's career as a playwright, except for the appearance of 'Titus Andronicus', probably first performed at the Rose Theatre on 24 January 1594. 'Titus', Shakespeare's first tragedy, shows further influences: Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' as a profoundly determining source for plots, speeches, language, and emotional power; Seneca's tragedies, filtered now through translations and popular adaptations; and, above all, the need to work through and resolve for himself the challenge presented by the theatrical power achieved by his greatest contemporary, Marlowe. 'Titus' also shows Shakespeare working with another collaborator, for George Peele was probably responsible for act I of 'Titus'. 'Titus Andronicus' was immediately, and remained, popular, also attested by the survival of a drawing by Henry Peacham of a scene derived from the play and by a performance for Sir John Harington at Burley on the Hill in 1596. 
The effective closure of the theatres may have also delayed the first performance of 'Richard III'. It seems likely that Shakespeare wrote the play not too long after finishing the 'Henry VI' trilogy, extending its scope and taking the narrative up to the accession of Henry VII and the inauguration of the Tudor dynasty. But the culminating part is radically different from its predecessors in its exploration of character with its astonishing creation of Richard as comic villain and, in the speech Richard is given on waking after the nightmare appearance of the ghosts of his victims on the night before the battle of Bosworth, with the discovery of a dramatic language never heard before in English drama in its depiction of the inner workings of a disordered mind. It is as if at this moment Shakespeare unlocks the vast potential of dramatic character and of the blank verse form for the first time. Perhaps this may have been a consequence of the delay caused by the plague. 
Something of Shakespeare's growing status perhaps at this time is indicated by his participation in the writing of 'Sir Thomas More'. The play, never printed, survives in a manuscript written by a number of hands. It is likely, though not absolutely certain, that Hand D, as it is known, is Shakespeare's and that this is therefore the only piece of his writing other than signatures to survive. The play was first written by Anthony Munday, perhaps with help from Henry Chettle, in 1592 or 1593. At some point thereafter, possibly in 1593 or 1594 (though equally possibly, as some have argued, as late as 1600-04), the play was heavily revised with, among others, Shakespeare (that is, Hand D) being called in to rewrite the scene where More stops the May day riots directed against immigrants in London. Collaborative writing in the period often divided plays up according to different writers' specialisms and Hand D, as a kind of play-doctor, was plainly recognized both as especially proficient in the writing of crowd scenes (as the Jack Cade scenes in '2 Henry VI' had demonstrated) and as someone of proven worth who could effectively resolve the difficulties. Ironically, Sir Edmund Tilney, master of the revels, approved the play provided that the scenes of the 'insurrection' were left out, though this may well refer to the scenes before Shakespeare revised them. 
The manuscript itself reveals much about Shakespeare's mode of composition and linguistic preferences with widely varying spellings. Jonson commented (in 'Timber', first printed in 1641), 'the Players have often mentioned it as an honour to 'Shakespeare', that in his writing, (whatsoever he penn'd) hee never blotted out line My answer hath beene, Would he had blotted a thousand' (Vickers, 1.26). But, though the passages by Hand D are far cleaner than many rough drafts, Hand D often changed his mind, blotting and interlineating as he went, often, it would appear, leaving out speech-prefixes of individual members of the crowd (and often marking them simply as 'other' or 'all') as if the dialogue had to be written without the names of speakers really mattering. The sheets in Hand D are as close as we are ever likely to come to Shakespeare in the throes of composition. 
About the same date, possibly in 1592 or 1593, Shakespeare contributed a sequence to another play. The main author or authors of 'King Edward III' (published in 1596) are unknown but Shakespeare wrote the episode of the king's unsuccessful wooing of the Countess of Salisbury, a witty and moving passage, markedly better than the rest of a mundane play and another indication of Shakespeare's recognition by his fellow dramatists as a writer well worth employing to improve a play. 
While the theatre companies toured the provinces and waited for the plague to abate far enough to enable the theatres to be permitted to reopen, Shakespeare turned to another kind of writing, Ovidian narrative poetry. 'Venus and Adonis' was published in 1593, printed by Richard Field ('b'. 1561), who had also come to London from Stratford upon Avon and may well have been Shakespeare's friend in childhood. Field had been apprenticed to Thomas Vautrollier, before taking over the business in 1590; Vautrollier had printed in 1579 Sir Thomas North's translation from Plutarch, 'The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans', and Field printed a revised edition in 1595, a volume that Shakespeare used extensively in play after play. Perhaps he bought books from Field or, just as likely, borrowed them from his fellow Stratfordian. 
The publication of 'Venus and Adonis' in 1593, the first printing of any work by Shakespeare, is perhaps less significant than the poem's dedication, signed by Shakespeare to mark his authorship and offering 'the first heir of my invention' to Henry Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton. A brilliant mixture of comedy and eroticism, 'Venus and Adonis' was Shakespeare's most popular work, if the number of reprints is a guide, with at least fifteen editions by 1636. If the tone of this dedication is formal, the language of the dedication to 'The Rape of Lucrece', printed by Field in 1594, speaks of a far closer friendship: 'What I have done is yours; what I have to do is yours, being part in all I have, devoted yours.' In the dedication to 'Venus and Adonis', he vowed to 'take advantage of all idle hours till I have honoured you with some graver labour'; 'Lucrece', with its violently erotic account of rape, passionate description of suicide, and serious portrayal of the overthrow of monarchy, is the powerful outcome of that promise. Both poems were widely alluded to and equally widely praised, apparently the first works by Shakespeare to gain wide approval from young, educated, fashionable male readers; as Gabriel Harvey noted, probably in 1601, 'The younger sort takes much delight in Shakespeares 'Venus, & Adonis': but his 'Lucrece', & his tragedie of Hamlet, Prince of Denmarke, have it in them, to please the wiser sort' (Chambers, 2.197). 
Shakespeare's toying in 'Venus and Adonis' with a desire for the male body that is as much homoerotic as heterosexual might well have endeared the poem to Southampton. Rowe's account in 1709 that Southampton gave Shakespeare the vast sum of $1000 is not credible; however, it might have been exaggerated from a smaller gift. But Rowe describes it as enabling Shakespeare 'to go through with a Purchase which he heard he had a mind to' ('Works', ed. Rowe, 1.x). There were three possible major pieces of expenditure to which this might relate: the acquisition of a share in the theatre company, the granting of a coat of arms, and the purchase of New Place, all three of which will be considered below. That the poems gained Shakespeare both money and a powerful friend, rather than simply the formal approval of an aristocratic patron, seems likely. A cryptic poem, 'Willobie his Avisa' (published in 1594), may, in its comments on H. W. and W. S., allude to a friendship or even a love affair between Southampton and Shakespeare. 
Before the plague most of Shakespeare's plays were probably written for and sold to Lord Strange's Men, later the Earl of Derby's Men, though '2' and '3 Henry VI' and possibly 'The Taming of the Shrew' were performed by Pembroke's Men, a company that flourished briefly in London between 1591 and 1593. If one notes the prominence of Lord Stanley, the Earl of Derby, in 'Richard III', then it may be a careful compliment to the current earl of Derby as the players' patron; if one sees the character as a perfect time-server who does his best to stay out of the battle until he can align himself with the winning side, then it may be rather less of a compliment. 'Richard III' may be the last play Shakespeare wrote with Strange's Men in mind. 
The effect of plague and the difficulty of making a profit by touring affected all the playing companies. The history of the theatre companies in London, their repertory and resources in this period, is as murky as much else to do with Shakespeare's life. 'Titus Andronicus', for instance, was performed by the three different companies named on the title-page of its first printing in 1594: Derby's (that is, Lord Strange's Men), Pembroke's, and Sussex's players; but it could have been either by each successively or by a company containing members of all three. But in May 1594 Henry Carey, Lord Hunsdon, who was lord chamberlain, and his son-in-law Charles, Lord Howard, the lord admiral and previous lord chamberlain, created something approaching a duopoly for their players in London. After the companies had briefly played as a combined company at Newington Butts in June 1594 (including performances of 'Titus Andronicus'), the abatement of the plague meant that they could properly return to the city. The Lord Admiral's Men took up residence at the Rose Theatre. Hunsdon's Men, now known as the Lord Chamberlain's Men, including some of the best actors of Derby's and Pembroke's companies, played at The Theatre to the north-east of the city, beginning their long and unequalled period as the greatest company of actors in the country. 
From this point on all Shakespeare's new plays were written for and belonged to the Lord Chamberlain's Men. What is more, payments to the company for their court performances over the Christmas season of 1594 name Shakespeare with William Kemp, the company's clown, and Richard Burbage, their leading actor, as the three payees, indicating their pre-eminent status among the small group of sharers in the company. Though often called actor-sharers, the participants in the Chamberlain's Men were unlikely to have included Shakespeare on the grounds of his acting ability. Uniquely among playwrights of the period, Shakespeare began a long and uninterrupted association with and participation in one particular theatre company, rather than, as it were, accepting freelance work for whoever would pay. Though later dramatists like John Fletcher, Philip Massinger, Richard Brome, and James Shirley had similar links to a particular company -- in Brome's case explicitly set out in a contract -- none seems to have been a sharer. Shakespeare was not only the Chamberlain's Men's house dramatist, producing on average two plays a year for them until his retirement, but also a close participant in their developing business. 
Either on the grounds of his reputation as a playwright alone or by virtue of a payment, Shakespeare had acquired a share in the new company and received his share of their fluctuating but sizeable profits over the rest of his life. The share also altered as the number of sharers varied, going from one-tenth in 1599 up to one-eighth when Will Kemp left and down to a twelfth and a fourteenth as further sharers were brought in. If the share was bought it was a shrewd investment, giving Shakespeare a certain amount of security of income, but it also conferred status on him as, in effect, a partner in a profit-sharing collective enterprise. 
In December 1594 the Chamberlain's Men performed 'The Comedy of Errors' at Gray's Inn. The play's design as a classical farce based on Plautus's 'Menaechmi', a play Shakespeare might well have read at school, made it especially suitable for the Christmas revels of the young gentry at one of the inns of court. In the course of the next year or so the company also performed 'Love's Labour's Lost', probably its lost sequel 'Love's Labour's Won', 'Richard II', 'Romeo and Juliet', and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', an extraordinary output that was perhaps the result of Shakespeare's busy writing activity during the plague time. In the flow of creativity in this period and with the imprecision inevitable in attempting to date the plays' writing and first performances accurately, other work may also belong to this period or even earlier: 'King John' was probably written in 1595 or 1596, a history play which, like 'Richard II', was written without being part of a sequence and which, in its extraordinary veering of tone from full-blown tragedy to mocking and satiric comedy, marks Shakespeare's most extreme view of the action of history and the legitimacy of kingship. 
Shakespeare's plays were also now beginning to be printed: unauthorized versions of '2' and '3 Henry VI' appeared in 1594 and 1595 respectively; 'Titus Andronicus' was published in 1594. A version of 'The Taming of the Shrew', with different character names and considerable adjustment of the plot, also appeared in 1594 as 'The Taming of a Shrew'. Some of this print activity may have been the result of the collapse of the companies which had owned the plays. The publication in 1595 of 'Locrine', 'Newly set foorth, overseene and corrected, By 'W.S.'' as the title-page describes it, may, if Shakespeare is the man behind the initials, be evidence of further work, seeing an anonymous play into print. 
Shakespeare was now demonstrating his consummate ease in a wide range of genres and theatrical techniques: the frenetic farce within a potentially tragic frame of 'The Comedy of Errors'; the learned, witty, verbal games and inconclusive ending of 'Love's Labour's Lost'; the lyrical virtuosity and sharply personal politics of 'Richard II'; the outrageous sexy comedy, romantic love, and tragic conclusion of 'Romeo and Juliet'; and the metrical pyrotechnics and supernatural mechanism of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. There is in this list a sustained experimentation with form, with theatricality, and with language. There was, as well, a new attitude to the materials out of which his plays were created. For 'Romeo and Juliet', for instance, he went back to a work he had used in part for 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona', Arthur Brooke's 'Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet' (1562; reprinted 1587), an immensely long poem in fourteeners, turning Brooke's rather dull epic into an exhilarating and immediate drama while mining the original for details to feed into his play. But it is striking, too, that neither 'Love's Labour's Lost' nor 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' has a single narrative source, something that could have offered Shakespeare a clear shape for the plot. Both comedies are also concerned with the nature of theatre itself, embedding into their final sequence a performance (the pageant of the Nine Worthies and the play of Pyramus and Thisbe) that both comments on the drama as a whole and analyses audience response. Shakespeare is clearly reflecting on his own art. 
Over the next two years, Shakespeare continued to write comedies set in Italy: 'The Merchant of Venice' marked the continuing influence of Marlowe, depending on 'The Jew of Malta' as 'Richard II' had on Marlowe's 'Edward II'; 'Much Ado about Nothing' turned a traditional trope of mistaken identity into a dark comedy on the social pressures to marry. But he also returned to 'Richard II' and began a new cycle of plays, explicitly designed, as the epilogue to 'Henry V' would make plain, to connect with his earlier cycle which had dramatized the collapse of rule, empire, and nation after the early death of Henry V. He turned back to the Queen's Men's play 'The Famous Victories of Henry V', with its sharp contrast of the prince's riotous youth and victorious adulthood, as a foundation for a prolonged meditation on the looming threat of succeeding to the crown, on the nature of kingship and the identity of England itself. The two parts of 'Henry IV' and 'Henry V' created a complete and continuous cycle of eight plays in all, a work of extraordinary ambition and scale, something no English dramatist had attempted before or would attempt again. 
But '1 Henry IV' brought him into conflict with a powerful family. In articulating a tension between the world of politics and an alternative culture in which Prince Henry resists the inevitable future call to the throne, Shakespeare originally named the prince's tavern companion Sir John Oldcastle. Whether deliberately or not, the name was guaranteed to offend the family of William Brooke, Lord Cobham, who had been lord chamberlain from 1596 to his death in 1597, for Oldcastle, the Lollard leader revered as a protestant martyr, was Cobham's ancestor. Under pressure from the family the name was changed to Sir John Falstaff, but only after '1 Henry IV' had been performed. Other names were changed in the play: Russell became Peto since the family name of the earls of Bedford was Russell, while Harvey became Bardolph since Sir William Harvey was about to marry the countess of Southampton. The politics of naming continued into 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' where Master Ford's original name in his disguise, Brook, while allowing watery puns on 'ford', had to be changed to Broom, again after the first performances: Shakespeare may well have first used Brook as a joke at the expense of Lord Cobham's surname. 
Rowe reported that Shakespeare wrote 'Merry Wives' at Queen Elizabeth's request, the queen being so pleased with the character of Falstaff that she 'commanded him to continue it for one Play more, and to shew him in Love' ('Works', ed. Rowe, 1.viii-ix). The anecdote is unlikely to be true, but it is far more probable that the play was performed at the celebrations in May 1597 before the installation into the Order of the Garter of Sir George Carey, now Lord Hunsdon, the son of the founder of the Chamberlain's Men and himself now in the same office after Cobham's death. Where there is neither proof nor likelihood that 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' was written for and performed at an aristocratic wedding, as is often suggested, 'Merry Wives', while also performed at The Theatre, was adapted to this specific occasion. The company clearly would have wished to praise their patron and mark his high honour and their playwright used his latest play, capitalizing on the exceptional success of Falstaff in the 'Henry IV' plays, to provide an appropriate tribute. Plays could earn companies money and goodwill in more ways than through the box office. 
But the years 1596 and 1597 were also deeply affected by more domestic matters. On 11 August 1596 Hamnet Shakespeare was buried. It is too easy to assume that all expressions of grief in the plays thereafter were a reaction to his son's death, but something of Viola's passionate mourning for the apparent death of her twin brother in 'Twelfth Night' could have been generated by the loss of Hamnet, Shakespeare's only male heir. It is not too fanciful to see Shakespeare drawn as a result towards the subject matter of 'Hamlet', where son grieves for father rather than father for son. 
Two months later John Shakespeare was granted a coat of arms, about twenty-five years after he had first applied for them, but it was probably William who reactivated the application. It was an opportune moment, for the Garter king of arms, Sir William Dethick, was fairly unscrupulous about entitlement and hence was attacked later by the York herald for granting arms not to John Shakespeare but to 'Shakespear the Player'. The draft spoke eloquently but probably fraudulently of the 'valeant service' done by John's 'late grandfather' for which he was 'advanced & rewarded by the most prudent prince King Henry the seventh'. But it more accurately identified John as an erstwhile bailiff in Stratford (albeit getting the date of office wrong). It also noted that John 'hathe Landes & tenementes of good wealth, & substance 500li,' (Chambers, 2.19-20). Even allowing for some exaggeration the statement suggests either a remarkable turnaround in John Shakespeare's fortunes or, more probably, an indication of William's rapidly accumulating wealth, enough to make the player and playmaker wish to be able to sign himself as a gentleman. The coat of arms, with gold and silver as its metals, was an expensive option if it was to be reproduced on the bearer's possessions. But the arms are surmounted by an arrogant falcon, punningly displayed shaking its angled spear which, with its silver tip, looks as much like a pen as a weapon. The bird may also be an allusion to the four silver falcons in Southampton's coat of arms. The design and its motto, 'Non sancz droict' ('Not without right'), were soon mocked by Jonson whose character Puntarvolo in 'Every Man out of his Humour' (Lord Chamberlain's Men, 1599) jeers at Sogliardo, the country clown, by suggesting he should have as his motto 'Not without mustard', an allusion both to Shakespeare's motto and to the yellow colour of his arms. 
In 1599 John Shakespeare made an application, probably never approved, to quarter the Arden arms with Shakespeare's and thereby cement the claim to gentility by association with a far more distinguished family. But Dethick's actions were challenged: Brooke, the York herald, identified twenty-three wrongly awarded coats of arms and, though Shakespeare's claim was defended, Shakespeare might never have been confident that the grant of arms had been fair. 
Soon afterwards, Shakespeare took another step towards establishing his status and position. While he was in London his wife and children had probably continued to live in Henley Street with his parents; there is no sign that Anne ever moved to London to be with her husband there. In May 1597 Shakespeare bought New Place, reputedly the second largest house in Stratford, with five gables, ten fireplaces, and a frontage of over 60 feet, together with two barns, two gardens, and two orchards. The price is unclear but was probably in excess of $120. There may have been some rebuilding -- a load of stone was sold to the town council in 1598 for 10died -- and by February 1598 Shakespeare was listed as living in Chapel Street ward, where New Place was situated, when he, together with many of his neighbours, was shown to be hoarding malt. Shakespeare's store (10 quarters or about 80 bushels) was about the average in the ward but, after three bad harvests, such hoarding was a serious action. 
Correspondence in 1598 between two Stratford men, Abraham Sturley and Richard Quiney, shows that they thought of Shakespeare both as 'our countriman' and as someone wealthy enough to be worth Quiney's approaching for a loan of $30 to pay his London debts. In London, Quiney wrote a letter to Shakespeare, in which he is addressed as 'Loveinge Contreyman'; though probably never sent, it is the only surviving piece of correspondence with him. Clearly Shakespeare's finances were sufficient to establish him as a highly visible member of the Stratford community and one seeking to rise further as a local worthy, showing him to have been considered a Stratford resident: Sturley's plan to sell Shakespeare 'some od yardeland or other att Shottri or neare about us' was something that 'would advance him in deede' (Chambers, 2.101-2). 
Over subsequent years Shakespeare consolidated his position in Stratford and it was there, rather than in London, that he made his major investments, perhaps because property in Stratford was considered, mistakenly, to be less vulnerable to fire than in London. In May 1602 he paid $320, an enormous sum, for 107 acres of land in Old Town in Stratford, bought from John and William Combe, and in September 1602 he acquired a cottage in Chapel Lane, probably to extend his land at New Place. In 1605 he paid $440 for a share in the tithes for Stratford, amounting to approximately one-fifth of the total value and worth $60 a year. 
In the course of less than a decade Shakespeare had earned, borrowed, or been given enough to spend nearly $900 in his home town. By comparison, it is not clear what sort of property Shakespeare lived in while in London at this time. Late in 1596 he was known to have been living in the parish of St Helen's, Bishopsgate, by having failed to pay various levies due at this time. His goods were valued in 1598 at a mere $5, a comparatively small sum. The location was reasonably convenient for walking to The Theatre. He had moved away by 1599 and was now resident in the Clink parish in Surrey, in the Liberty, conveniently close to the site of the new Globe Theatre where the company was resident for the rest of his career, once it had rebuilt The Theatre on its new site south of the Thames when the lease expired on the land it had occupied. None of this suggests much of a commitment to living in London by comparison with the sustained, substantial, and frequent investment in and around Stratford. 
But the move to be near the Globe Theatre marks a new stage in Shakespeare's professional career and it is an apt moment to take stock. He had become a widely known and admired playwright and poet. The 'Parnassus' plays, performed by students of St John's College, Cambridge, at the Christmas celebrations between 1598 and 1601, mock Gullio who speaks 'nothinge but pure Shakspeare, and shreds of poetrie that he hath gathered at the theators' and praises 'sweet Mr. Shakspeare!'; Gullio will sleep with 'his 'Venus, and Adonis' under my pillowe' (Chambers, 2.200-01). Poets like Richard Barnfield, John Marston, Robert Tofte, and John Weever referred to Shakespeare's plays and poems in their own poems and epigrams published in 1598 and 1599. In 1598, in 'Palladis tamia: Wits Treasury', Francis Meres praised Shakespeare fulsomely (all Meres's praise is fulsome): 'As 'Plautus' and 'Seneca' are accounted the best for Comedy and Tragedy among the Latines: so 'Shakespeare' among the English is the most excellent in both kinds for the stage', going on to list six comedies and six tragedies (four of which would now be identified as histories) as proof of Shakespeare's status (F. Meres, 'Palladis tamia', fol. 282'r'). In 1600 a collection of quotations, 'Belvedere, or, The Garden of the Muses' included over 200 passages from Shakespeare, mostly from 'Venus and Adonis', 'Lucrece', and 'Richard II'. 
In March 1602 John Manningham, a barrister at the Middle Temple where Shakespeare's 'Twelfth Night' had been performed the previous month, noted a bawdy story about Shakespeare and Burbage in his diary; whether true or not, the story (of Shakespeare having sex with a woman who had wanted an assignation with Burbage whom she had fallen for as Richard III) indicates that Shakespeare was a figure to be gossiped about, though Manningham had to remind himself of Shakespeare's first name. Sir George Buck, unsure who had written 'George a Greene' (1599), wrote on his copy that Shakespeare had told him it was by 'a minister who acted the pinners part in it himself' (Nelson, 74); Shakespeare's information was probably wrong but Buck saw him as someone worth consulting on such matters. Finally, in this sequence of contacts, Shakespeare's success was sufficient to make one of his colleagues mock him: Jonson's 'Every Man out of his Humour' (1599) has a number of satirical allusions to Shakespeare's recent plays as well as to his gentrified status. This amounts to more than a private dig at a friend: Jonson appears to have expected the audience to understand the barbs, yet another sign of Shakespeare's popularity. 
Shakespeare's plays were also starting to appear in print both in versions that give unauthorized and often inaccurate versions of the plays and in reasonably carefully prepared versions, the latter often in response to the former: for example the quarto of 'Romeo and Juliet' published in 1599, 'Newly corrected, augmented, and amended', in answer to the imperfections of the 1597 quarto. The suspect quartos often bear apparent traces of performance in their more elaborate stage directions. A positive flurry of editions appeared in 1600: '2 Henry IV', 'Henry V', 'The Merchant of Venice', 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', and 'Much Ado about Nothing', as well as reprints of three other plays and 'The Rape of Lucrece'. Some of these published editions of his plays now carried the author's name on their title-pages -- for example, 'Love's Labour's Lost', the second quartos of 'Richard II' and 'Richard III' all published in 1598, or the third quarto of '1 Henry IV' in 1599 -- another indication of Shakespeare's growing reputation and significance, since playwrights were not usually named on their plays in print. 
In 1605 the placing of Shakespeare's name on the title-page of 'The London Prodigal', a play certainly not by Shakespeare, is a further sign that his name was a good marketing ploy; the same (presumably deliberate) misattribution happened with the publication of Middleton's 'A Yorkshire Tragedy' in 1608 (though some have argued that the play is by Shakespeare). 
Similarly, in 1599 William Jaggard published the second edition of a collection of poems called 'The Passionate Pilgrim' (the date of the first edition is uncertain) which the title-page also attributed to Shakespeare, much to Shakespeare's annoyance that Jaggard, as Thomas Heywood noted, 'altogether unknowne to him... presumed to make so bold with his name' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 219). Very little of the collection was by Shakespeare but it included pirated and unattributed printings of three extracts from 'Love's Labour's Lost' offered as poems and of two of Shakespeare's sonnets ('138' and '144'). Meres had noted that 'the sweete wittie soule of 'Ovid' lives in mellifluous & hony-tongued 'Shakespeare', witness his 'Venus 'and' Adonis', his 'Lucrece', his sugred Sonnets among his private friends, &c.' (F. Meres, 'Palladis tamia', fols. 281'v'-282'r'). Whenever the sonnets were written, these two at least were by 1599 available in versions Jaggard could use. 
Having completed the second tetralogy in his history cycle, with the epilogue to 'Henry V' gesturing to the earlier sequence ('Which oft our stage hath shown'; epilogue, l. 13), Shakespeare might reasonably have thought he had dramatized enough English history and had made enough use of Holinshed's 'Chronicles'. He turned to Roman history, a field he had ignored since 'Titus Andronicus' but a rich resource for political analysis of contemporary society. 'Julius Caesar' was probably the first play the Chamberlain's Men performed at their new theatre, the Globe, where Thomas Platter, a Swiss traveller, saw it on 21 September 1599. Shakespeare's main source was North's Plutarch -- perhaps he had now acquired a copy from Richard Field -- and Shakespeare kept closer to his source than ever before, dramatizing Plutarch often simply by turning North's prose into verse. Roman historical tragedy may have been successful but 'Julius Caesar', like 'Titus', was not to be the start of a sequence, though 'Antony and Cleopatra' would later take up the story. 
Women disguising themselves as young men had been a useful plot device in both 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona' and 'The Merchant of Venice'. Something, perhaps the expertise of a particularly brilliant boy player, made the prospect of making this transformation especially central to a comedy clearly appealing. In 'As You Like It' (1599-1600) and 'Twelfth Night' (1601), Shakespeare explored the idea to something approaching its limits. For 'As You Like It', his principal source was Thomas Lodge's prose romance 'Rosalynde' (1590) but, where Lodge's work is unequivocally placed in the forest of the Ardennes, Shakespeare's play is set ambiguously in France and in the Forest of Arden that had covered the centre of England and from which his mother's family derived its name. In this play Shakespeare also paid a small tribute to Marlowe as Phoebe remembers the words of the 'Dead shepherd': 'Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?' (III.v, ll. 82-3). 'Twelfth Night''s first recorded performance was at the Middle Temple; John Manningham noted its likeness to Plautus's 'Menaechmi' and 'most like and neere to that in Italian called 'Inganni'' (Chambers, 2.328). 
In both plays Shakespeare made use of the talents of the Chamberlain's Men's latest recruit, Robert Armin, who replaced Will Kemp in 1599; Armin's skills as a singer are clear in Touchstone and Feste, the first signs of the line of fools that Shakespeare wrote for him, far more bitter than those for Kemp. 
Between the two comedies Shakespeare wrote 'Hamlet', rewriting the 'Hamlet' play that had been playing on the London stage by 1589 and may have been written by Thomas Kyd. Now lost and probably never printed, the earlier play and its own sources can be presumed to have provided a similar narrative but a simpler one. Nothing in them would have been as complex or provocative as Shakespeare's creation of the prince whose thought processes have been so profoundly influential on Western literature. Whatever else made the writing of 'Hamlet' happen at this time, the extraordinary talents of Richard Burbage were a major determinant on the creation of the role, his lifelike acting deeply affecting Shakespeare's portrayal of the prince's mind. But, in creating Ophelia, Shakespeare seems also to have remembered a Stratford event, the inquest into the drowning, just outside Stratford in December 1579, of the aptly named Katherine Hamlett. 

'Hamlet' has its topical references to the work of the boys' companies, the popular rivals to the success of the Chamberlain's Men, but Shakespeare's 'Henry V' had made a more direct and political reference in its anticipation of the return of Essex, 'the General of our gracious Empress' (V, chorus, l. 30), from subduing the rebellious Irish during the earl of Tyrone's uprising. But when Essex did return, unexpectedly and without permission, the eventual tension placed Shakespeare and the Chamberlain's Men in danger: Essex's ally Sir Gilly Meyrick and others of Essex's faction paid for the company to perform Shakespeare's 'Richard II' two days before Essex's attempt at a coup in February 1601, daring to suggest to the audience that Essex would be Elizabeth's Bolingbroke. The actors claimed later, examined in the dangerous days following the failed coup, that they had argued that the play was 'so old and so long out of use' that 'they shold have small or no Company at yt' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 160) but were persuaded to perform it for an extra $2. Shakespeare's play was clearly perceived as dangerous and the scene of Richard's deposition was never included in published versions until the fourth quarto (1608). The performance did no lasting damage to Shakespeare or to the theatre company which continued to be summoned to play at court for the Christmas festivities. 
Other events of 1601 link Shakespeare and Stratford upon Avon. In March Thomas Whittington, who had been shepherd to Shakespeare's father-in-law, made his will, bequeathing to the poor the $2 which Anne Shakespeare had and which William therefore owed to his estate. Quite why the money had been loaned or deposited with Anne is unclear but it seems to indicate Shakespeare's absence from her. On 8 September 1601 John Shakespeare was buried in Stratford. No will survives but William, as the eldest son, would have inherited the house in Henley Street, though, with New Place, he had no need of it: his mother and his sister Joan, who had in the 1590s married William Hart, a hatter, together with her family continued to live there. 
Unsurprisingly, most of the documents that speak of Shakespeare in connection with Stratford over the next few years concern legal matters: in spring 1604 he sold malt to a neighbour, Philip Rogers, and subsequently lent him 2's'.; Rogers repaid 6's'. and Shakespeare sued for the remainder of the debt, 35's'. 10died There was another suit for a debt owed by John Addenbrooke: Shakespeare pursued him in the courts from August 1608 to June 1609, seeking $6 plus 24's'. damages. Clearly Shakespeare was not willing to let such matters drop whether the sums were substantial or not, though in 1608 he may have been short of income with the theatres again shut by plague. 
Shakespeare's densely enigmatic allegorical poem 'The Phoenix and Turtle' was published in 1601, appended to Robert Chester's 'Love's Martyr' in a group, 'Poeticall Essaies', including poems by Marston, Chapman, Jonson, and others, offered as a tribute to Sir John Salusbury with whom Shakespeare has no other known connection. In the following year Shakespeare wrote 'Troilus and Cressida', in part a response to George Chapman's translation of Homer's 'Iliad', a section of which had been published in 1598, and in part an engagement with Chaucer's long poem and Henryson's continuation, the first time Shakespeare had made extensive use of Chaucer since 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. Cynical about sexual desire and war, the play's bleakness may have been aimed at a different audience from that of the Globe -- if it was performed at all -- since, when it was published in 1609, it carried an epistle identifying it as 'a new play, never stal'd with the Stage, never clapper-clawd with the palmes of the vulger' ('Troilus and Cressida', 1609, sig. PP2'r'); the phrase may refer to performance in a space other than the Globe. 
The accession of James I brought the Chamberlain's Men an extraordinary honour: soon after arriving in London, James took over the patronage of the company, now to be known as the King's Men. For the king's entry into London in May 1604, Shakespeare and the other players, like the members of the Queen's Men, Prince Henry's Men, and many other members of the royal household, were each given four and a half yards of red cloth, possibly to march in the procession or line the route. The King's Men frequently performed at the new court: between November 1604 and October 1605 they played eleven different works, seven of which were by Shakespeare, including new plays such as 'Measure for Measure' and 'Othello' and older ones such as 'The Merchant of Venice' (twice) and 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'; between the patent of May 1603 and Shakespeare's death they performed at court on at least 107 occasions. 
Yet royal patronage could not solve some of the company's problems: performances at the Globe in 1603-4 had been frequently stopped for lengthy periods because of a sequence of plague, Elizabeth's final illness, public mourning, and further outbreaks of plague. The king gave the company $30 to tide them over while they could not perform. Not until April 1604 was public playing allowed again. 
Shakespeare had hardly been idle during this difficult time for the company: 'Measure for Measure', 'Othello', and 'All's Well that Ends Well' belong to 1603-4. They follow the ambiguity of genre that characterizes 'Troilus and Cressida' which was variously identified as a comedy in the prefatory epistle, a history on the title-page of the quarto of 1609, and a tragedy in the first folio. They share a world of misplaced sexual desire where one body can be substituted for another either unknowingly, as in the bed-tricks of 'Measure' and 'All's Well', or in fantasy, as in Iago's report that Cassio had taken Othello's place in the marriage-bed. While 'Othello' is a tragedy using the materials of comic cuckoldry, the other two can be wrenched from potential tragedy towards an uncertain comic ending. 
In 1605 and 1606 Shakespeare's playwriting energies were spent on unequivocal tragedies: the astonishing sequence of 'Timon of Athens', 'King Lear', 'Macbeth', and 'Antony and Cleopatra'. In 'Timon', for the first time since the early stages of his career (depending on exactly when Shakespeare contributed to 'Sir Thomas More'), Shakespeare collaborated with another dramatist, the younger and equally successful Thomas Middleton, the two dividing the play up between them. Middleton was probably also responsible for some of the witches' scenes in 'Macbeth' in the only form in which they reached print and he revised 'Measure for Measure' in 1621 shortly before it was first printed in the first folio. Shakespeare was not a dramatist who worked in isolation from his fellow playwrights: he was strongly influenced by their plays and by their audiences' responses, just as his work also influenced them. Collaboration became increasingly a part of his playwriting method for the remainder of his career. 
Political and other contemporary events affected the plays too. Both 'King Lear' and 'Macbeth' reflect in some ways the accession of King James: James's concern to unite Scotland and England seems to underpin the division of the kingdom in 'Lear', a warning of the consequences of disunity, while his claim of descent from Banquo is explicitly imaged in 'Macbeth' where the witches show Macbeth the line of Banquo's descendants stretching towards James himself. 'King Lear' also reflects a recent case in 1603 when Brian Annesley's eldest daughter tried to have her father declared insane and was prevented by the loving care of Annesley's youngest daughter, Cordell. 
Yet if all these plays cannot be seen as other than tragedies, they are deliberately 'impure'. As Antony Scoloker commented in 1604 in the epistle to his poem 'Diaphantus': a good poem should be 'like 'Friendly' 'Shakespeare's' 'Tragedies', where the 'Commedian' rides, when the 'Tragedian' stands on Tip-toe: Faith it should please all, like Prince 'Hamlet'' (Chambers, 2.214-15). 'Lear' and 'Macbeth' are both based on events that, for Shakespeare and his audiences, were the stuff of the chronicles: the source material for both lay in Holinshed; both are histories, as the first published edition of 'Lear' (1608) is identified on its title-page. Shakespeare continued to rely on sources that had served him well so far: Holinshed and Plutarch above all but also the repertory of the Queen's Men (for the anonymous 'King Leir'), Apuleius's 'The Golden Ass', and Ovid. 
Records of Shakespeare's friends and family provide other suggestions about his life at this time. Augustine Phillips, a fellow sharer in the King's Men, died in 1604, leaving 'my ffellowe william Shakespeare a Thirty shillings peece in gould' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 204), as he did to other players but naming Shakespeare first. It is reasonable to assume that his fellows in the theatre company were among his closest friends. William Barksted, a minor playwright, wrote warmly of Shakespeare as 'so deere lov'd a neighbor' (Chambers, 2.216). Perhaps to this period too belong the stories, anecdotal but not contradicted by the evidence of surviving comments, of his close friendship and genial rivalry with Jonson. 
As becomes apparent from the records of a case in 1612, Shakespeare was living from 1602 to 1604 as a lodger with Christopher Mountjoy and his family in Silver Street in the respectable neighbourhood of Cripplegate. The case provides rare glimpses of Shakespeare's London life in 1602-4 and in 1612. Mountjoy, a French Huguenot refugee, with his wife and daughter, was a successful tiremaker who made wigs and headdresses; Shakespeare might have met them through the French wife of the printer Richard Field who lived nearby, but theatre companies always needed the services of wigmakers and the Lord Chamberlain's Men may have been the connection. Other dramatists lived near, including Jonson, Dekker, Munday, and Field, while John Heminges and Henry Condell, fellow sharers, were pillars of a local church, St Mary Aldermanbury. 
The case of 1612 was brought by Stephen Belott, Mountjoy's former apprentice, who had married Mountjoy's daughter in 1604 and claimed that Mountjoy had failed to pay the dowry promised. Shakespeare was called as a witness and is mentioned by other witnesses. He helped in the marriage negotiations: Mountjoy asked him to encourage Belott to agree to the match and the young couple made their troth-plight in his presence. Six months after the wedding, the Belotts moved out and stayed with George Wilkins, a petty crook who ran a tavern and a brothel. Wilkins was also a writer whose work included a play and a novella, 'The Painful Adventures of Pericles Prince of Tyre' (1608), which combines material from Twine's romance 'The Pattern of Painful Adventures' (reprinted in 1607) and from Shakespeare's 'Pericles', written in 1607, probably in collaboration with Wilkins who may have contributed the first two acts. Mrs Mountjoy died in October 1608 and the Belotts returned to Silver Street. Arguments continued and Belott sued in 1612 for the unpaid $60 dowry and $200 to be included in Mountjoy's will. 
Shakespeare was one of three witnesses examined on 11 May 1612. His deposition brings the closest record of Shakespeare speaking, albeit through the court style of the examiner's clerk. Shakespeare attested that Belott was, in his view, 'A very good and industrious servant' who 'did well and honestly behave himselfe', though he also said that Mountjoy had not 'confesse[d] that he hath gott any great proffitt and comodytye' from Belott's service. He also deposed that the Mountjoys showed Belott 'great good will and affecceon' and that Mrs Mountjoy 'did sollicitt and entreat [him] to move and perswade [Belott] to effect the said marriadge and accordingly [he] did'. On the matter of money Shakespeare could not remember (or chose not to remember) how large the marriage portion was to have been, nor whether there was to have been a sum in Mountjoy's will, nor 'what Implementes and necessaries of houshold stuffe' Mountjoy gave Belott as part of the marriage settlement (Schoenbaum, 'Records', 25). Further witnesses were examined on 19 June but Shakespeare, though named in the margin of the interrogatories, did not depose again. 
In the event the matter was referred to the elders of the French church, who ordered Mountjoy to pay Belott 20 nobles; but Mountjoy, who had fathered two bastards and was excommunicated for his dissolute life, never paid. Whatever the neighbourhood may have been, the Mountjoys were hardly the respectable family they might at first have appeared. The case is trivial enough but it shows Shakespeare caught up in the kind of arguments over money and marriage that figured in many plays of the period. 
Events in Shakespeare's family in Stratford in this period balanced good and bad news. In May 1606 his daughter Susanna was listed with other residents of Stratford for refusing to take holy communion at Easter, perhaps a sign that she might be a covert Catholic since such actions were bound to be noticed in the tense aftermath of the Gunpowder Plot. Susanna married in June 1607; her husband, the physician John Hall (1574/5?-1635), was known to be strongly protestant in his faith. There appears to have been a substantial marriage settlement in which Shakespeare settled on Susanna 105 acres of his land in Old Stratford, probably retaining a life interest in it; it amounts to a very valuable dowry. Shakespeare's younger brother Edmund had become a player, following his eldest brother to London, where both he and his infant son died in 1607; William may well have been the person who paid 20's'. for his brother's burial in St Saviour's, Southwark, 'with a forenoone knell of the great bell' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 26). In February 1608 Shakespeare became a grandfather with the birth of Elizabeth Hall. In September 1608 his mother died. 
In the meantime, he was developing new forms for his drama. 'Pericles' marked a new departure for Shakespeare, a drama whose narrative spreads to and fro across the Mediterranean, with a chorus, the poet John Gower whose poem 'Confessio amantis' is one of the play's sources, returned from the grave to tell the tale. From the finality of losing the beloved daughter at the end of 'King Lear' to the possibility of a family being reunited at the end of 'Pericles' is an enormous distance. 'Pericles' was the only play largely written by Shakespeare not to be included in the 1623 first folio but it appeared in a quarto edition in 1608. Its immediate popularity may be indicated by the presence of the French and Venetian ambassadors at a performance in 1608. 
If the play marked the start of a new phase in Shakespeare's writing, he made a last exploration of tragedy: 'Coriolanus', once again derived from Plutarch, is his fiercest study of the politics of the state and its citizens, spurred on by the immediate threat of the midlands uprising of 1607-8, a series of outbreaks of popular unrest caused by bad harvests and inflationary food prices. The riots occurred close to Stratford and William Combe, from whom Shakespeare had bought the land in Old Stratford in 1602, warned Lord Salisbury of the risk of sedition. 
By 1609 about half of Shakespeare's plays had appeared in print. His long narrative poems continued to be reprinted. In 1609 Thomas Thorpe published 'Shake-Speares Sonnets', printed by George Eld who printed the first quarto of 'Troilus and Cressida' in the same year. The foregrounding of Shakespeare's name in the very title of the volume suggests that it may well have been authorized by Shakespeare, who could have sold the sequence to Thorpe for publication; the frequent closures of the theatres yet again because of plague in 1607-9 could have encouraged him to find another source of income. Thomas Heywood indicated in 1612 that Shakespeare's annoyance with the earlier unauthorized publication of some of the sonnets in 'The Passionate Pilgrim' had made him take action: 'hee to doe himselfe right, hath since published them in his owne name' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 219). 
The 'Sonnets' were prefaced by an enigmatic dedication (with each word followed by a period) signed with Thorpe's initials, mimicking the form of Ben Jonson's dedication of 'Volpone' to the universities (published by Thorpe in 1607): 'To the onlie begetter of these ensuing sonnets Mr W.H. all happinesse and that eternitie promised by our ever-living poet wisheth the well-wishing adventurer in setting forth.' Thorpe included 154 sonnets, following them with the long poem 'A Lover's Complaint'. One of the sonnets may date back to his courtship of Anne Hathaway in 1582; Meres had spoken of his 'sugred Sonnets' circulating in manuscript in 1598; a few had been printed in 1599. But when the bulk of them and 'A Lover's Complaint' were written is a matter for argument. So too are the identities of Mr W. H., who may or may not be the young man to whom most of the sonnets are directed, of the 'dark lady' to whom others are aimed, and of the rival poet who appears in the sequence. Shakespeare, the consummate dramatist, may of course be constructing a drama set out in sonnets without any real figures behind it, but if the poems do tell of events in Shakespeare's life the identities of the participants come to matter greatly. 
None of the many attempts at identifying the dark lady or the rival poet are finally convincing. But the case for the young man's being William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke, is more thorough and effective, even if there is a strong counter-claim that 'Mr W. H.' deliberately reverses the initials of Henry Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton, who was Shakespeare's patron in the early 1590s. Shakespeare had little known contact with Herbert, though Herbert and his brother were the dedicatees of the first folio in 1623 and praised there for having 'prosequuted both [Shakespeare's plays], and their Authour living, with so much favour' (sig. greekLetterpi A2'r'). 
The sonnet sequence begins with a group of seventeen poems, apparently commissioned by the young man's family, that attempt to persuade him to marry and leave versions of himself behind in his children; Herbert had repeatedly refused proposed marriages and it is tempting to date these poems to his seventeenth birthday in 1597, perhaps the ones to which Meres referred. Equally well, if this part of the sequence is earlier than 1597, they could have been written to Southampton. In the absence of any significant external evidence, tests of vocabulary tend to suggest that some of the sonnets belong to the mid-1590s, while other internal indications, including possible allusions to the death of Elizabeth, suggest a date about 1603, when 'A Lover's Complaint' is most likely to have been written as a deliberate coda to the sequence. There is no reason to assume that the sequence was written at one time, nor that its differing segments were originally intended to belong together. Most of the poems, with their account of homoerotic desire between the older poet and a younger and unfaithful man (sonnets '1'- '126'), the counter-attractions of heterosexual desire ('127'- '152'), and a continual return to self-humiliation, self-loathing, and sexual disgust, may well have been revised. All one can be sure of is that the poems could not have reached their final form as a sequence, ending with the 'Complaint', until at least 1603 and it is just as likely that they were finally revised shortly before publication. Perhaps the two periods of plague and closure provided Shakespeare with opportunities and reasons to work on his sonnets. 
In the whole outpouring of sonnets in England in the period, only Richard Barnfield, in 'Cynthia' (1595), wrote poems directed to a man. The 'Sonnets' in their repeated punning on Shakespeare's first name make the embedding of the poet himself into the sequence plain. Their explicit homoeroticism suggests that Shakespeare's sexuality was consciously bisexual in its desires, though the modern concept of bisexuality and one appropriate to Shakespeare's lifetime may be significantly different. Whether Shakespeare's homoerotic desires led to or were connected with sexual acts with the young man or indeed any other man is far from clear. Read as biographical, they also make plain that fidelity to Anne was not something Shakespeare was much concerned about, though adulterous sex with the 'dark lady' induced deep shame. Whatever their biographical secrets, the poems have an emotional intensity and poetic complexity that make them among Shakespeare's greatest achievements. 
In 1608 the King's Men had acquired the lease of the Blackfriars Theatre, an indoor playhouse with a far smaller capacity than the Globe and with far higher admission prices; they acted there from the autumn of 1609. The company played in both venues but Blackfriars was by far the more prestigious. With its greater range of stage machinery, its increased use of music, its habitual division of plays into acts (with music between the acts), and its narrower social range of audience, Blackfriars offered Shakespeare a set of new challenges that he responded to in 'The Winter's Tale', 'Cymbeline', and 'The Tempest', and in his final collaborations with John Fletcher. It appears that Shakespeare was writing plays less frequently than earlier, perhaps now no more than one a year. 'The Winter's Tale', 'Cymbeline', and 'The Tempest' belong to the years 1609-11 but the exact order in which they were written is impossible to determine, for all that critics prefer to see a simple sequence according to their own preference for a linear dramaturgical development. Shakespeare turned, as for 'Pericles', to the materials of prose romance narrative, for 'The Winter's Tale' using Greene's old tale 'Pandosto' (1588). All three play self-conscious games with narrative and its amenability to dramatic form: 'The Winter's Tale' is broken-backed, something it shares with 'Timon of Athens', moving from compressed urban tragedy to leisurely pastoral comedy before returning redemptively to the location of its tragic phase; 'Cymbeline' ostentatiously foregrounds the long sequence of its own multiple revelations that lead to the drama's resolution, as if teasing the audience to find it merely comic; 'The Tempest' uses Prospero's magic to achieve compression into three hours on a metamorphic island. All three are particularly aware of their artifice and of the playwright's own art. If they seem to belong only to the world of romance, they are also full of topicality: 'Cymbeline''s movement to Milford Haven harks back to Richmond's landing to overthrow Richard III, and the play is full of comment on King James's vision of Britain as a newly united nation; 'The Tempest' plays on the colonizing of America and the encounters with the New World transposed into the Mediterranean. The clashes of worlds, old and new, ancient and modern, near and far, search for new unities. 
The style of these plays connects with the drama that Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher were writing at the same time, though the direction of influence is far from clear. Certainly Shakespeare found a new and systematic collaboration with Fletcher desirable and satisfactory, for his next three plays were shared with the younger dramatist who had already written, probably in 1611, a sequel to 'The Taming of the Shrew' as 'The Woman's Prize, or, The Tamer Tamed'. As with so many contemporary examples of collaboration it is difficult to be sure of the precise shares: each play is perfectly coherent in performance. 'Cardenio', based on an episode in 'Don Quixote', was never printed but a manuscript, now lost, was claimed by Lewis Theobald to be the source for his play 'The Double Falsehood' (1728) which shows strong traces of Fletcher in its style. After a prolonged break from the genre, Shakespeare and Fletcher returned to the now unfashionable mode of English history with 'Henry VIII', known to contemporaries as 'All is True'. Its worries about competing politics and nostalgia for the optimism at the birth of Elizabeth testify to a cultural nervousness. Finally, if the assumed sequence of the plays is correct, came 'The Two Noble Kinsmen', a return to the chivalric world of Chaucer's 'Knight's tale' but coupled with an unnerving depiction of obsessive desire. Least known of all his work, Shakespeare's final collaborative plays show him continuing to experiment, returning to familiar topics but always in unfamiliar ways. 
Following Shakespeare's writings chronologically has obscured two important kinds of work. The first is difficult to determine: a number of lyrics and occasional epigrams have been attributed to Shakespeare but there is little hard evidence for any of them. There are epitaphs on people, with some of whom Shakespeare had a known or possible connection -- for example, the verses on John Combe which were claimed to have been on his monument in Holy Trinity Church in Stratford, or the one on Elias James, a brewer who worked close to the Globe Theatre -- and with some of whom there is no known link. It is not even certain that Shakespeare wrote the lines that appeared on his own grave, though they were recorded as his by the mid-seventeenth century. It is, though, probable that he wrote some occasional verse, whether songs, epigrams, or epitaphs. In March 1613 he certainly composed the 'impresa' (an allegorical insignia with a motto) carried by the earl of Rutland at the king's accession day tilt; he was paid 44's'., as was Richard Burbage for painting and making it. It is a rare moment linking Shakespeare directly with court events; unlike Ben Jonson, for instance, Shakespeare wrote masques as part of his plays, not for the court, and, though his plays were often performed at court, he was never one of the writers working for court circles. 
The second kind of work is Shakespeare's repeated revising and rewriting of his plays. With the plays being part of the stock repertory of the Chamberlain's Men / King's Men, Shakespeare would have had repeated opportunities to reconsider his work. For some plays there is occasional evidence of revision in the stages of the original composition evident in the single text that reached print: a passage repeated with variants in 'Love's Labour's Lost', for instance, seems to show Shakespeare's first and second thoughts for the speech. But for a number of plays that were printed both in quarto and in the first folio, the variants often indicate large- and small-scale revision. Characters' roles are expanded (for example, Emilia in 'Othello'); speeches are rethought; lines are added here and there to produce different echoes and connections; lines, speeches, and whole scenes are deleted to alter the dramatic form and the theatrical pacing. In the cases of 'King Lear' and 'Hamlet' the alterations between the versions are so substantial as to suggest that each survives as two rather significantly different plays, a quarto and a folio text. Texts in the theatre are often unstable entities; actors change lines they dislike and playwrights alter in response to the experience of rehearsal and production. Shakespeare is unlikely to have made the changes only once; rather, many plays, particularly the most popular ones, are likely to have undergone continual alteration over the years, but leaving only two snapshots of the long process, from first composition through years of performances, surviving in the printed texts. 
In 1613, at the very end of his playwriting career, Shakespeare made a substantial investment in property in London, buying the gatehouse of the old Dominican priory in Blackfriars, where the Blackfriars Theatre was located, for $140. Burbage had also bought property in the area and Shakespeare's purchase may have been simply an investment, since one John Robinson was a tenant there in 1616. But the gatehouse was large enough for Shakespeare to have let part of it and used the rest himself. Wherever he was living in London after leaving the Mountjoys, he could have been in the Blackfriars gatehouse from 1613. Shakespeare paid $80 of the purchase immediately and mortgaged the remainder. Though he was the purchaser, the property was held by him with three others as trustees: John Heminges of the King's Men, William Johnson, the landlord of the Mermaid Tavern, and John Jackson, possibly the husband of the sister-in-law of Elias James the brewer. The effect may well have been, whether by Shakespeare's design or not, to exclude Anne Shakespeare from having a widow's claim on a third share of the property for her life, her dower right, unless Shakespeare survived the other trustees. 
The King's Men remained successful: at the celebrations for the marriage of James I's daughter to the elector palatine in February 1613 they performed fourteen plays, four of which were by Shakespeare (including the not exactly propitious 'Othello'). But in June 1613, during a performance of Shakespeare's 'Henry VIII', the Globe Theatre burnt down after some of the stuff shot out of a small cannon, for a sound effect, lodged in the thatch. The sharers decided to rebuild at the cost of over $1400, each sharer contributing between $50 and $60. Shakespeare had certainly sold his share in the company by the time he made his will in 1616; this may have been a good moment to get out. 
In 1709 Nicholas Rowe suggested that Shakespeare spent his last years 'in Ease, Retirement, and the Conversation of his Friends... and is said to have spent some Years before his Death at his native 'Stratford'' ('Works', ed. Rowe, 1.xxxv). But, though the story has taken permanent hold, there is no evidence for Shakespeare's having retired to Stratford. In November 1614 Thomas Greene, Stratford's town clerk from 1603 to 1617, who repeatedly refers to Shakespeare as his cousin, was in London and noted that, Shakespeare 'commyng yesterday to towne I went to see him howe he did' (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 231). Where Shakespeare came from he does not say -- it might well have been Stratford -- but Shakespeare still came to London. Greene had been at Middle Temple when 'Twelfth Night' was performed there and, with his wife and his children, Anne and William (perhaps the Shakespeares had stood godparents to them), were living in New Place in 1609. 
Events in Stratford continued to involve Shakespeare, whether he was there or not. He was one of seventy-one Stratford citizens who subscribed to contribute to the cost of promoting a bill in parliament for the repair of roads, being named first, added in the margin, after the town's officials. A visiting preacher was entertained at New Place in 1614, though it is not clear whether Shakespeare was there at the time. There were family sadnesses too: two of his brothers died, Gilbert in February 1612 and Richard in February 1613, leaving only William and his sister Joan alive in that generation. In July 1613 his daughter Susanna brought a case in the bishop's consistory court that John Lane, a wild young man, had slandered her with an accusation of adultery with Rafe Smith and of having gonorrhoea; she won. 
There was a local crisis too that affected Shakespeare. William Combe was the son of the William Combe from whom Shakespeare had bought the land in Old Stratford, and cousin of John Combe who left Shakespeare $5 in his will in 1614. Combe and Arthur Mainwaring, steward to Lord Ellesmere, wanted to enclose land at Welcombe from which Shakespeare and Thomas Greene had tithe income. The Stratford corporation opposed the enclosure. Shakespeare covenanted with Mainwaring's agent to be compensated, along with Greene, 'for all such losse detriment & hinderance' consequent on the enclosure (Schoenbaum, 'Documentary Life', 231). Greene's notes on his conversation with Shakespeare in London in November 1614 showed that Shakespeare knew how much land was intended to be enclosed and that compensation would be fixed the following April. Neither Shakespeare nor his son-in-law, John Hall, believed that the enclosure would go ahead. In December the corporation wrote to Shakespeare and Mainwaring to explain their opposition, not least because a fire in July 1613 had left many residents homeless. Combe's men began enclosing in the same month, but the ditch was filled in by women and children. Combe tried bribing Greene unsuccessfully. The struggle dragged on for years until Combe more or less abandoned his plans. Shakespeare's position in all this seems consistent: he was far more concerned to safeguard his income than to protect the townspeople's rights. 
In January 1616 Shakespeare summoned his lawyer, Francis Collins, to draft his will. The decision was probably provoked by the impending marriage of his other daughter, Judith, to Thomas Quiney, son of Richard Quiney who had sought a loan from Shakespeare in 1598. Thomas was five years younger than Judith and Shakespeare had good reason to distrust him. The marriage took place in February 1616 in the middle of Lent without a special licence, an ecclesiastical offence for which Quiney was excommunicated. But, far more seriously, in March, Margaret Wheeler died giving birth to Quiney's child. Quiney admitted fornication in the ecclesiastical court and was ordered to do public penance, but paid a fine of 5's'. instead. The first of the three pages of the will was revised late in March, apparently taking account of his son-in-law's crimes by altering the bequests to Judith. 
Perhaps nothing in Shakespeare's plays has provoked quite as much commentary as his will (Chambers, 2.170-74). The three pages with their many corrections and interlineations seem full of afterthoughts and adjustments. Shakespeare's first concern is with Judith who would immediately inherit $100 and a further $50 in return for giving up her rights in a copyhold in Rowington to her sister and a further $150 in three years' time; if she were to die before then and without issue, the money would go to Shakespeare's granddaughter Elizabeth Hall and his sister, Joan Hart. But Judith would only receive the interest on the second tranche if she were married, unless her husband matched the capital sum. Thomas Quiney is never named and the will's phrase about 'such husbond as she shall att thend of the saied three Yeares be marryed unto' at the very least suggests that she might be married to someone other than Quiney by then. Shakespeare moved on to take especial care of his sister. In the event, Joan's husband, William Hart, died in April 1616, a week before Shakespeare; but she was clearly in need of help. She received $20, his clothes, and the house in Henley Street during her lifetime at a peppercorn rent; $5 went to each of Joan's three sons. Shakespeare's plate was to go to his granddaughter Elizabeth except 'my brod silver & gilt bole' which went to Judith. Shakespeare left $10 to the poor of Stratford, not a particularly large sum given his wealth and the fact that his lawyer would receive $13 6's'. 8died; his sword went to Thomas Combe and there were other bequests to local friends. He had been going to leave a small sum to Richard Tyler but Tyler's name is deleted for some reason. There were extra bequests to buy rings to Hamlet Sadler, his godson William Walker, and others. Of his 'ffellowes' in the King's Men, Shakespeare remembered, belatedly and in an interlineation, only three -- Burbage, Heminges, and Condell -- who would each receive 26's'. 8died for rings. Almost everything else went to Susanna, some in reconfirmation of the marriage settlement but the rest carefully tied up for the future for any sons she might have (up to seven) and only then to Elizabeth Hall or thereafter to Judith and her future sons. The generosity to Susanna and therefore to John Hall who were also appointed executors is offset by the tightly limited bequests to Judith. There is no mention of books or papers in the will -- hardly a surprise since these would be part of his household goods which the Halls would receive; they did not need special reference. 
Interlineated as an afterthought on the third page is the only reference to Anne, like Quiney unnamed: 'Item I gyve unto my wief my second best bed with the furniture'. The second-best bed may well have been the marriage bed with the best bed reserved for guests. But it is not clear whether in Stratford Anne would automatically have received the widow's dower rights of one-third of the estate; there were sharp regional variations in practice. Certainly the will's silence prevents her having control over any part of the estate. Other wills were far more explicit: Burbage's 'wellbeloved' wife was his executor; Henry Condell's 'wellbeloved' wife received all his property (E. A. J. Honigmann and S. Brock, 'Playhouse Wills, 1558-1642', 1993, 113, 157). The lack in Shakespeare's will of even a conventional term of endearment, of specific and substantial bequests to Anne, or even of the right to continue living in New Place amounts to a striking silence. 
On 23 April 1616 Shakespeare died. John Ward, a clergyman living in Stratford in the 1660s, recorded that 'Shakespear, Drayton, and Ben Jhonson had a merry meeting, and itt seems drank too hard, for Shakespear died of a feavour there contracted' (Chambers, 2.250). The story is not impossible but quite what Shakespeare died from is unknown. He was buried two days later in Holy Trinity, inside the church rather than in the churchyard because his purchase of an interest in the Stratford tithes in 1605 made him a lay rector. The epitaph, possibly written by himself, warning future generations to leave his bones where they lay, was inscribed on the grave, though the grave may not originally have been where the stone is now placed. Anne lived until 1623 (she was buried on 8 August) but her tombstone makes no mention of her husband, and refers to only one daughter; Judith seems to have been ignored. 
Anne probably lived to see the monument to her husband in Holy Trinity Church (which was certainly in place by 1623) but she could not have seen the publication of 'Mr William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, and Tragedies' (the first folio) in November or December of the same year. The monument and the title-page to the volume are the only two images of Shakespeare to have an especially strong likelihood of accuracy. The former was made by Geerart Janssen, a sculptor of Dutch descent; his father was also a sculptor who had made the tomb for the earl of Southampton, father of Shakespeare's patron. The Janssens had also worked for the earls of Rutland and were commissioned in 1618 to make a tomb for the fifth earl, by the sixth earl for whom Shakespeare and Burbage had made their 'impresa' in 1613. Depicted as a writer, his mouth open as he prepares to write on the paper under his left hand (though the earliest reproduction, by Dugdale in 1656, dispensed with pen and paper), the Shakespeare of the monument has seemed too corpulent for some admirers, as if genius should be lean. It is precisely its unremarkable appearance, described by Dover Wilson as that of a 'self-satisfied pork-butcher' (Schoenbaum, 'Records', 161), that has convinced others of its accuracy. Frequently restored and recoloured -- it was painted white in 1793 at Edmond Malone's urging but returned to what were assumed to be the original colours in 1861 -- the monument was used by the Flower brewery in Stratford as the trademark to sell its products and plaster casts derived from it were widely distributed. It is still the representation of Stratford's view of Shakespeare. 
London's view may be embodied in the image on the title-page of the collection of his plays. The engraving has usually been ascribed to Martin Droeshout the younger, aged only twenty-one when the portrait was made in 1622, probably initially for separate distribution and not as part of the forthcoming volume, but its old-fashioned style might possibly have been the work of his uncle, Martin Droeshout the elder (1565x9- 'c'.1642), a Flemish protestant refugee in England and a leading member of the Painter-Stainers' Company in London at this time. This image of Shakespeare with its massive dome of a forehead 'like another dome of St Paul's' (A. L. Rowse, quoted in Schoenbaum, 'Records', 171), concealing, it seems to imply, a brain of disproportionate size, has become one of the most potent icons of Western culture, the very essence of the originating author making his presence visible in connection with his works. It can now be found on thousands of products, from tea towels to plastic bags to the British Library's computer catalogue (until 1999), but the mere idea of placing an image of an author on the title-page of a collection was unusual. There was no engraving of Ben Jonson on the title-page of Jonson's folio edition of his 'Works', published in 1616. But Jonson's poem on the Shakespeare portrait, placed to face it opposite the title-page, identifies both the image's accuracy and its inadequacy: '
O, could he but have drawne his wit 

As well in brasse, as he hath hit 

His face; the Print would then surpasse 

All that was ever writ in brasse. 

' The image exists in three distinct states in different copies of the first folio and the deteriorating plate was used for the subsequent folios as well. It was the source for William Marshall's engraving for the pirated 1640 edition of Shakespeare's poems and William Faithorne's for the 1655 edition of 'The Rape of Lucrece'. Thereafter it became fair game for anyone seeking to represent their version of Shakespeare. 
Droeshout's engraving is also the source of the 'Flower' portrait, now owned by the Royal Shakespeare Company, which was found in 1840 and was then claimed to be Droeshout's source. Its date is unclear and it has now been shown to be a nineteenth-century forgery. It reflects the often desperate desire to find authentic images of Shakespeare, like the Ashbourne portrait (not of Shakespeare at all), first 'identified' in 1847, and the Ely Palace portrait, also a supposed source for Droeshout, discovered in 1845. Others were 'found' earlier, like the Felton or Burdett-Coutts portrait exhibited in 1792 or the Janssen portrait engraved in 1770; still others surfaced much later like the Grafton portrait, unknown before 1907, or the Sanders portrait, publicized in 2001. Sometimes a known image is, for a while, claimed to be of Shakespeare, like the Hilliard miniature which Leslie Hotson identified as Shakespeare in 1977. None of these is likely to be a portrait of Shakespeare independent of the Droeshout engraving or the Stratford bust; many are not even images of Shakespeare at all. Their claims are no more probable than that the plaster cast now in Darmstadt is indeed Shakespeare's death mask. 
The only exception to this long succession of dubious manifestations of the bardolatrous desire to have a new image to worship is the Chandos portrait, the most probable of all the claimed portraits. Its provenance secure from 1719 (though earlier owners may have included the actor Thomas Betterton), it eventually came to the Chandos family and was then given by Lord Ellesmere in 1856 as the first picture (still catalogued as 'NPG 1') to enter the infant National Portrait Gallery, an image of the nation's greatest writer with which symbolically to found a collection of British historical portraits. It was copied by Kneller for John Dryden by 1694, Dryden responding with a poem to Kneller praising Shakespeare's 'Majestick Face' (Dryden, 'To Sir Godfrey Kneller', 'The Poems and Fables of John Dryden', ed. James Kinsley, 1962, 497). A version by Michael van der Gucht was part of the frontispiece of Rowe's edition of 1709 and the Tonson family's sequence of Shakespeare editions through the eighteenth century (until 1767) continued the tradition. Indeed, since the Tonsons' address from 1710 was a building they named 'Shakespeare's Head', the Chandos portrait became their commercial trademark. It has been reproduced at least as often as the Droeshout engraving. 
Probably painted by John Taylor about 1610 the Chandos image is, if genuine, the only one made before Shakespeare's death. Its swarthiness has created anxieties among some who saw it as too Italian or too Jewish to be Shakespeare's true likeness. Its fashionable gold earring has troubled others at times when male dress was more restrained. It has, more often, been seen as a more acceptably realistic image than either the Droeshout engraving or the Stratford monument. 
Shakespeare's death prompted at least one elegy: a poem usually ascribed to William Basse circulated quite widely in manuscript but was not printed until 1633 (when it appeared as by John Donne). The poem's conceit that Spenser, Chaucer, and Beaumont should move up in their tombs in Westminster Abbey to leave space for Shakespeare was well enough known for Jonson to allude to it and reject it in his poem 'To the memory of my beloved, the author Mr. William Shakespeare: and what he hath left us' prefixed to the first folio. For Jonson, Shakespeare was: '
a Moniment, without a tombe 

And art alive still, while thy Booke doth live, 

And we have wits to read, and praise to give. 
(W. Shakespeare, 'Comedies, Histories, and Tragedies', 1623, sig. greekLetterpiA4'r')' Although Shakespeare's death was not marked by a published collection of verses, an exceptionally rare public effusion for any writer, his work continued to be powerfully influential on contemporary audiences and dramatists alike. Far from his plays and poems coming quickly to be seen as old-fashioned and outdated, references and allusions to his plays and poems in commonplace books, poems, and other writings certainly did not stop with the end of his career. Shakespeare's spectators and readers remained fascinated by his work. 
As significantly, just as Shakespeare himself continually reworked scenes, characters, speeches, and thoughts from his own and others' earlier plays into his latest writing, so other playwrights turned to Shakespeare as a major resource for their own development. The late plays and the final collaborations with Fletcher spawned dozens of imitations, as if Shakespeare had defined the age's style. But there were quotations and allusions in numerous plays, ranging from the deliberately resonant to the probably unconscious, as if writing plays now necessitated engagement with his work in a playwriting culture effectively in part defined and even dominated by Shakespeare. When, like Desdemona, the heroine in Webster's 'The Duchess of Malfi' (printed 1623) revives for a few moments after being strangled, or when Cornelia in his 'The White Devil' (1612) madly distributes herbs like Ophelia, when Middleton's and Rowley's 'The Changeling' (performed 1622) has an honest villain like Iago and their Beatrice, like Shakespeare's in 'Much Ado', asks a man to undertake a killing each woman is unable to do for herself, then these great younger contemporaries are, consciously or not, deriving their effects from Shakespeare. But such recycling of Shakespearian materials is not in any way restricted to the work of the best: out of dozens of possible examples, one might note a drama of lovers from rival families in Thomas May's 'The Heir' (acted 1620), a murderer who cannot wash the blood from his hands in William Heminges's 'The Jews' Tragedy' ('c'.1626), or a play put on for royalty by workers whose leading actor wants to play all the parts in Thomas Rawlins's 'The Rebellion' (printed 1640). Shakespeare was not the only dramatist to affect those who came after, nor is it sensible to try to quantify resonances, borrowings, and allusions to determine whether Shakespeare was more or less influential than Jonson. But his plays were already becoming a central store of possibilities which dramatists could raid, largely without acknowledgement. 
Where the raiders could find the work changed substantially with the decision to publish something approximating to a volume of Shakespeare's collected plays. In 1616 the publication of Ben Jonson's 'Works' marked the first occasion on which the plays of a vernacular dramatist had been collected. Jonson had spent years on the volume and had included poems and prose works as well. The project to gather Shakespeare's work may have begun with John Heminges and Henry Condell, Shakespeare's fellow actors, though it is tempting to imagine that Shakespeare's bequest of money for rings to them in his will signalled that the plan was Shakespeare's own. 
The planning may have been accelerated, and may even have been provoked, by Thomas Pavier's unauthorized publication in 1619 of a group of quartos of plays ostensibly by Shakespeare. Pavier and his printer William Jaggard included two plays certainly not by Shakespeare, 'Sir John Oldcastle Part 1' (first printed as Shakespeare's in 1600) and 'A Yorkshire Tragedy', and one other, 'Pericles', that would not be part of the first folio. Some of the title-pages had false dates; all were reprints of previously published plays. Most significantly, the collection of ten plays was sold as a set and the Stationers' Company responded to the lord chamberlain's complaint, presumably instigated by the King's Men as owners of the plays, to prohibit publication of their repertory without their consent. 
The publication of a folio of Shakespeare's plays was ambitious and expensive. While Heminges and Condell signed the volume's dedication to the earl of Pembroke, who was lord chamberlain, and his younger brother, and were also the authors of the prefatory letter 'To the great Variety of Readers', they were not necessarily the folio's editors, in the modern sense of the word. The cost of the publishing was, as the volume's colophon indicated, the responsibility of William Jaggard and his son Isaac, Edward Blount, John Smethwick, and William Apsley. The publishers needed to secure the printing rights to a number of plays that had already appeared and Smethwick and Apsley, who owned the rights to four and two plays respectively, may have become involved for that reason. 
There were thirty-six plays in the volume: eighteen had never been printed before (including, for instance, 'Julius Caesar', 'Twelfth Night', 'Macbeth', 'Antony and Cleopatra', and 'The Tempest') and sixteen of these were acquired from the King's Men themselves. Isaac Jaggard and Edward Blount entered their rights in sixteen plays in the Stationers' register in November 1623, shortly before the volume appeared, including in their list 'Antony and Cleopatra', which Blount had entered in 1608 but never printed. The publication syndicate had to negotiate with seven other stationers for the rights to other plays. News of the planned folio may have encouraged the reprinting of a number of Shakespeare plays in the early 1620s and the first publication of 'Othello' in 1622. Problems over rights may have been the cause of the delay in printing 'Troilus and Cressida', which is not named on the contents page (three copies of the volume without the play survive); though originally intended to follow 'Romeo and Juliet', it was in the end placed ambiguously between the histories and the tragedies, either the last of the former or first of the latter. Of the plays which subsequent bibliographers would assign substantially or significantly to Shakespeare, only collaborative plays ('Pericles', 'The Two Noble Kinsmen', 'Cardenio', and 'Edward III') were missing. 
Printing began early in 1622 and took nearly two years. The compositors' copy came from a variety of sources: for example, scribal copies made by Ralph Crane and others from Shakespeare's manuscripts; quartos annotated by reference to manuscript playbooks used at the theatre; the playbooks themselves; and Shakespeare's 'foul papers'. Having decided not to include Shakespeare's poems (which were not reunited with the plays in any edition until 1790), the editor(s) chose to arrange the volume unconventionally by genre and to allow the genres to be the volume's title: 'Mr. William Shakespeare's Comedies, Histories, and Tragedies'. Ben Jonson's naming his volume as his 'works' had attracted some mockery, but the editorial choice of genre as the controlling taxonomy for Shakespeare straitjackets some plays awkwardly. Some had been published with other generic definitions -- for example, 'Richard II' and 'Richard III' had both been published as tragedies, not histories; 'King Lear' as history, not tragedy. The folio's organization would cast a long shadow over centuries of analysis. 
Within the genre of history the plays, which included only English histories (not British or Roman ones), were arranged by chronological order of reign. Comedies and tragedies were fairly randomly sequenced. None of the ordering reflected the chronology of composition or performance, leaving, again, much confusion and sheer hard work to come. 
But the choice of format, for all Jonson's precedent, was crucial, giving the volume the instant status of a classic: it is a weighty tome, a book for individuals' libraries, a collection perhaps to be owned rather than read and few surviving copies show traces of early readers. It was also expensive, probably not less than 15's'. a copy and often costing $1 or more. It remained expensive, with copies in the early twentieth century selling for over $50,000 and one being sold in October 2001 for over $6 million, six times the previous record price for a copy. The first folio's status as a library book probably helped so many copies to survive: over 220 are known, nearly eighty of them in the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington. 
In addition to the plays, preface, portrait, and dedication, the volume included a list of the principal actors in the plays and three prefatory poems, as well as Jonson's two, by Hugh Holland, Leonard Digges, and I. M. (probably James Mabbe). It amounts to a grand but not excessively elaborate quantity of prefatory material. 
Without the first folio it is likely that most of the eighteen plays printed there for the first time would never have been printed at all. In effect, half Shakespeare's reputation rests on that publication. No literary volume has generated so much commentary and analysis. Technical study of its printing means that more is known about the processes of its production than for any other early modern book. There have been numerous facsimiles and, of course, innumerable reprintings of its contents. 
The volume was first announced in October 1622 -- prematurely, for copies were not on sale for more than a year. William Jaggard was dead by November 1623 and it is his son's name that appears on the title-page. The first known purchase of a copy, by Sir Edward Dering, was in December 1623. Sales were brisk enough to warrant the printing of a second edition in 1632, with three more prefatory poems, including John Milton's first published poem, and with careful revision of the plays to correct many errors (and introduce some more). The quality of the paper led the scourge of the players, William Prynne, to complain that 'Shackspeers Plaies are printed in the best Crowne paper, far better than most 'Bibles'' (W. Prynne, 'Histriomastix', 1633, sig. **6'v'). The third folio was published in 1663; a second issue in 1664 added seven more plays, only one of which, 'Pericles', is Shakespeare's while the others (including 'The London Prodigal' and 'Locrine') belong to the body of Shakespeare apocrypha, keeping their place in the succession of Shakespeare editions for many years. A fourth folio was printed in 1685 and pages from it were reset to produce a putative 'fifth folio' probably shortly after 1700. 
Publication of the poems was markedly less successful. Though 'Venus and Adonis' and 'The Rape of Lucrece' were frequently published up to the 1630s (at least fifteen and eight times respectively), each was printed only once more before 1700. The 'Sonnets' were reprinted by John Benson in 1640 in an unauthorized version which ran a number of sonnets together to form longer works, gave many trivial titles (such as 'Love's relief' or 'The picture of true love'), and altered a few pronouns to reduce the emphasis on homoerotic desire. Benson also included many poems not by Shakespeare at all. 
The plays continued to be performed through the years before the theatres were closed in 1642. There were performances at the Globe and the Blackfriars but the casts were changing. As actors died or left the King's Men others took over their roles, but some thought it could not be the same: an elegy on the death of Richard Burbage in 1619 mourned: '
Kind Leer, the greved Moore, and more beside, 

That lived in him, have now for ever dy'de. 
(E. K. Chambers, 'The Elizabethan Stage', 1923, 2.309)' There were performances elsewhere: Sir Edward Dering's library contained an adaptation of the two parts of 'Henry IV' into a single play, probably for a private performance. Some characters were already dominating their plays: a court performance of '1 Henry IV' on 1 January 1625 was referred to as 'Sir John Falstaff'. But a remarkable range of plays which were hardly of the newest fashion were performed at Charles I's court, including 'Othello', 'Hamlet', 'Julius Caesar', 'Cymbeline', and 'Richard III'. Charles himself was keen enough on Shakespeare to annotate his copy of the second folio, retitling 'Much Ado' as 'Beatrice and Benedict'. 
One other admirer at court was Sir William Davenant, whose ode on Shakespeare was published in 1638, the year he became poet laureate. Davenant, whose parents kept an inn in Oxford, variously claimed to be Shakespeare's godson and natural son, the latter especially when drunk. 
More ambivalent, inevitably, were the responses of John Milton, who saw his happy man in 'L'Allegro' ('c'.1631), a poem full of Shakespeare echoes, going to the theatre to hear: '
sweetest Shakespeare, fancy's child, 

Warble his native wood-notes wild 
(ll. 133-4)' and whose 'Comus' (1634) is pervasively influenced by Shakespeare. But if Shakespeare's work is never far from Milton's mind, especially in 'Samson Agonistes' and 'Paradise Lost', his plays also stand, in Milton's prose writing, as tools with which to beat the crown: in 'Eikonoklastes' (1649), Charles I is compared with Shakespeare's Richard III. 
During the closure of the theatres in the interregnum and probably also in the early years of the Restoration, comic parts of Shakespeare's plays were performed for popular audiences as drolls at fairs, taverns, at the otherwise empty theatres, and elsewhere: versions of the gravedigger scene in 'Hamlet' and the Gadshill robbery in '1 Henry IV' were printed in 1662 with a frontispiece showing Falstaff and Mistress Quickly, the first published illustration of Shakespearian characters, while the preface to 'The Merry Conceited Humours of Bottom the Weaver' (1661), a very short version of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', reported performances by apprentices. 
When public performances resumed in 1660, Shakespeare was quickly put back into the repertory. The company playing at the Red Bull Theatre in late 1660 performed 'Henry IV', 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' (another mark of the especial popularity of Falstaff), and 'Othello', while 'Pericles' was at the Cockpit Theatre in Drury Lane. After November 1660 (when the two theatre companies under Thomas Killigrew and Sir William Davenant began competing operations) Killigrew's King's Company, claiming to be the successors to the King's Men, also claimed the rights in their predecessor's repertory, including Shakespeare. 
On 11 December 1660 they performed 'Othello' with one notable change: a woman played Desdemona. A new prologue 'to introduce the first Woman that came to Act on the Stage' noted the necessity: '
For (to speak truth) men act, that are between 

Forty and fifty, Wenches of fifteen; 

With bone so large, and nerve so incomplyant, 

When you call 'Desdemona', enter Giant. 
(T. Jordan, 'A Royal Arbor of Loyal Poesie', 1663, 21-2)' The next day, 12 December 1660, Davenant was awarded rights in nine Shakespeare plays (including 'King Lear', 'Macbeth', and 'Hamlet'), following his proposition 'of reformeinge some of the most ancient Playes that were playd at Blackfriers and of makeinge them, fitt, for the Company of Actors appointed under his direction and Command' (A. Nicoll, 'A History of English Drama, 1660-1900', 6 vols., 1952, 1.352). It is difficult to know which of the two changes was the more important. The replacement of the boy-actresses with women irrevocably changed the forms of Shakespearian representation. The right to alter plays seen as 'ancient' began the long history of Shakespeare adaptation. Each change had immense impact on Shakespeare in the theatre. A third major change was introduced in June 1661 when Davenant's company moved to the Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre which was equipped with moveable scenery, the first ever in England. Not everyone was impressed: Richard Flecknoe wrote in 1664 'that which makes our Stage the better, makes our Playes the worse perhaps, they striving now to make them more for sight, then hearing' (R. Flecknoe, 'Love's Kingdom', 1664, sig. G7'v'). 
Shakespeare's plays were not especially popular at this time and his name was not one yet able to draw the crowds. Davenant made 'Henry VIII' a success in 1663 by spectacular new scenery and costumes and the performance of Thomas Betterton as Henry was exceptional, not least through being part of a tradition: 'he being Instructed in it by Sir 'William' [Davenant], who had it from Old Mr. 'Lowen', that had his Instructions from Mr. 'Shakespear' himself' (J. Downes, 'Roscius Anglicanus', 1709, 24). Samuel Pepys was regularly impressed by the new scenery and especially by Betterton's acting in Shakespeare, praising his Hamlet as 'beyond imagination' in August 1661 (E. L. Avery and others, 'The London Stage, 1660-1700', 1965, 32). Others were less excited: John Evelyn who saw the production in December 1661 thought that 'now the old playe began to disgust this refined age' (ibid., 43). 
Pepys, who often saw Shakespeare plays among his many theatre visits, seeing 'Macbeth' and 'The Tempest' especially frequently, offers some sense of how a member of the audience estimated Shakespeare's worth. Some plays he admired; others disappointed. 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' was 'the most insipid ridiculous play that ever I saw in my life' but relieved by 'some good dancing and some handsome women' (E. L. Avery and others, 'The London Stage, 1660-1700', 1965, 56). Both qualities mattered to Pepys. While he respected 'Macbeth' as 'a deep tragedy', he particularly enjoyed the 'variety of dancing and music' (ibid., 100, 107). After his first visit to 'The Tempest' he praised a musical echo effect and later noted that the play was 'full of so good variety, that I cannot be more pleased almost in a comedy' (ibid., 123). 
In neither case was Pepys seeing Shakespeare's play unaltered. Davenant's 'Macbeth' substantially added to the spectacle of the witches' scenes; Downes noted that: 'being drest in all it's Finery, as new Cloath's, new Scenes, Machines, as flyings for the Witches; with all the Singing and Dancing in it... it being all Excellently perform'd, being in the nature of an Opera, it Recompenc'd double the Expence. (J. Downes, 'Roscius Anglicanus', 1709, 33)' Less play than opera (for its effects as much as its music), Davenant's version also increased the actresses' roles, emphasized Macbeth's ambition with a dying line 'Farewell vain World, and what's most vain in it, Ambition' ([W. Davenant], 'Macbeth', 1674, 60), and cleaned up the language: Macbeth no longer curses the 'cream-faced loon' asking 'Where gott'st thou that goose look?' (V. iii, ll. 11-12) but politely enquires 'Now Friend, what means thy change of Countenance?' (54). Such linguistic changes were necessary: Shakespeare's vocabulary was difficult, his syntax obscure, and his fascination with metaphor unacceptable since 'the tongue in general is so much refined since Shakespeare's time' as John Dryden noted in 1679 (J. Dryden, 'Troilus and Cressida', 1679, sig. A4'v'). 
Davenant's adaptation of 'Hamlet' makes similar changes, altering 'To grunt and sweat under a weary life' (III.i, l. 79) into 'To groan and sweat under a weary life', and 'the native hue of resolution' (III.i, l. 86) becomes 'the healthful face of resolution', no longer 'Sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought' (III.i, l. 87) but now 'Shews sick and pale with thought' ([W. Davenant], 'Hamlet', 1676, 39). Davenant's playing text marked extensive cuts, according to the edition of 1676, in the places 'least prejudicial to the Plot or Sense' because the play was 'too long to be conveniently Acted'. But the edition also includes the full text 'that we may no way wrong the incomparable Author' (sig. [A]2'r'). Clearly, by this date, Shakespeare, simply an old dramatist at the Restoration, was becoming valued. 
While Davenant's first Shakespeare adaptation, combining 'Measure for Measure' and 'Much Ado' into 'The Law Against Lovers' (1662), was much more extreme, his version of 'The Tempest' as 'The Enchanted Island', a collaboration with Dryden first produced in 1667, was a case of adding to the play's symmetry. Dryden's preface, which saw Fletcher's 'The Sea-Voyage' (1622) and Sir John Suckling's 'The Goblins' (1638) as earlier responses to the play, praised Davenant for contriving a 'Counterpart to 'Shakespear''s Plot' in balancing Miranda with Hippolito, 'a Man who had never seen a Woman' (Davenant and Dryden, 'The Tempest', 1670, sig. A2'v'). The new action with four lovers is by turns innocent and outrageously sexy. But much more striking is the expansion of the action of rebellion, with more sailors and a broader representation of the chaos of disorder. The adaptation manifests the deep cultural unease of a society only just recovering from civil war, making of Shakespeare's play, as with other early adaptations of pre-Restoration drama and with the new tragi-comedies being written, a fiercely political parable. 
Other adaptations sought different solutions to making the plays stage-worthy again: James Howard wrote a happy ending for 'Romeo and Juliet' in 1662 with the lovers left alive, the adaptation being played on alternate nights with the tragic original; John Lacy turned Grumio in 'Shrew' into a Scot in his farcical adaptation 'Sauny the Scot' (1667) in which he starred, with the play now set in London. The Dryden-Davenant 'Tempest' was itself adapted by Thomas Shadwell in 1674 into a spectacular version with more machines, stage effects, and much more music, compensated for by cutting the text hard to make room. Howard's play is lost, 'Sauny' was popular for a while, but Shadwell's 'Tempest', rescored by Purcell in 1690, lasted over a century. Like Davenant's 'Macbeth', the new version displaced Shakespeare's from the stage. Other plays could be used as, in effect, the raw material for theatrical spectacle, most notably the version of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' as 'The Fairy Queen' (1692), again with music by Purcell, whose scenes do not set a single word by Shakespeare. The adaptations also became part of the wars between the theatres: the Duke's Company's success with Shadwell's 'The Tempest' provoked the King's Company to put on Thomas Duffett's parody 'The Mock-Tempest' (1674), the first in a long line of Shakespeare burlesques. Duffett also mocked the rival company's 'Macbeth' in his farce on 'The Empress of Morocco' (1674). In both cases it is not Shakespeare that is being mocked; his plays are the convenient vehicle for mocking rivals' theatrical styles. 
None of this was incompatible with increasing praise for Shakespeare himself. Dryden, who became as crucial to the next phase of Shakespeare adaptation as Davenant had been at first, defined Shakespeare as the crucial originating natural force which enabled others: '

'Shakespear', who (taught by none) did first impart 

To 'Fletcher' Wit, to labouring 'Johnson' Art. 

He Monarch-like gave those his subjects law, 

And is that Nature which they paint and draw. 

' Dryden here also identifies Shakespeare as the poetic equivalent of divine kingship: ''Shakespear''s pow'r is sacred as a King's' (Davenant and Dryden, 'The Tempest', 1670, sig. A4'r'). The concepts of Shakespeare as natural genius and as a sacred king were both of immense and potent influence. Throughout his career Dryden sustainedly turns to Shakespeare as a measure of value. It is Shakespeare who is Dryden's example of the supreme dramatist in his 'Essay of Dramatic Poesy' (1668), 'the man who of all Modern, and perhaps Ancient Poets, had the largest and most comprehensive soul' (J. Dryden, 'Of Dramatick Poesie: an Essay', 1668, 47). His own 'All for Love' (1678) was an attempt 'to imitate the Divine 'Shakespeare'' (sig. b4'v'). Even in his preface to his version of 'Troilus and Cressida' (1679), a work about which he felt unsure, he identifies Shakespeare as being 'held in the same veneration... by us' as Aeschylus was by the Athenians (sig. A4'v'), while the prologue to the play is spoken by Shakespeare's ghost: 'See, my lov'd 'Britons', see your 'Shakespeare' rise' (sig. b4'r'). 
But Dryden's degree of praise was still unusual. It was shared by Margaret Cavendish, whose letter on Shakespeare was published in 1664 and ranks as the first lengthy critical assessment of his work. For her, Shakespeare's brilliant characterization would make one 'think he had been Transformed into every one of those Persons he hath Described', an early example of praise of Shakespeare for protean transformation (Thompson and Roberts, 12). Few went as far the other way as the critic Thomas Rymer, who in 'A Short View of Tragedy' (1693) damned 'Othello' as 'a Bloody Farce' (p. 146), mockingly suggesting that its morals were to advise 'all good Wives that they look well to their Linnen' and 'a lesson to Husbands, that before their Jealousie be Tragical, the proofs may be Mathematical' (p. 89). 
Nahum Tate was only stating a common view rather than an extreme one when he described 'King Lear' as 'a Heap of Jewels, unstrung and unpolisht' (N. Tate, 'King Lear', 1681, sig. A2'v'). His concern to find an 'Expedient to rectifie what was wanting in the Regularity and Probability of the Tale' led to his writing in a love between Edgar and Cordelia and altering the ending to 'conclude in a Success to the innocent distrest Persons' (ibid., sigs. A2'v'-A3'r'). With no Fool to trouble the tragic tone and a new love scene for Edmund and Regan 'amorously Seated' in 'A Grotto' (ibid., 40), Tate's version (1681), the most notorious of the adaptations, may be designed to make the play more manageably moving but it is also a serious attempt to read the play politically, celebrating the king's 'blest Restauration' (ibid., 66). Equally political and topical was his attempt to stage 'Richard II' in 1680, first banned outright and then, after two days of performances transposed to Italy as 'The Sicilian Usurper', banned again. Tate was not much luckier with his version of 'Coriolanus' as 'The Ingratitude of a Commonwealth' (1681), clearly establishment in its politics but not much liked by audiences. 
As Tate found, amid the upheavals of the Popish Plot and the exclusion crisis, Shakespeare's plays were means of making dangerous political statements: Ravenscroft's 'Titus Andronicus' (1678) was a satire on Titus Oates and the whigs; Otway's 'Caius Marius' (1680), from 'Romeo and Juliet', explored the plight of those caught up in political and social struggles. Tate's problems with censorship were not the last: Colley Cibber's 'Richard III' (1700), a version long-lived enough to leave traces on Laurence Olivier's film (1955), was first performed without its first act, borrowed from '3 Henry VI', since the murder of a king was still unstageable when likely to be seen as a parallel to the death of James II. Cibber carefully distinguished his lines from Shakespeare's in the printed text, again a mark of Shakespeare's growing importance as an originating text. 
Adaptations apart, the whole course of drama was being profoundly affected by Shakespeare. Playwrights creating Restoration comedies found their crucial prototypes for the wit-combats of hesitant lovers in Beatrice and Benedick while 'Love's Labour's Lost' offered a model for a comedy that did not end with marriage but with future trials, a vital component in the work of Etherege and others. Otway's fascination with Shakespearian tragedy led directly to his brand of pathetic drama: 'The History and Fall of Caius Marius' (1680) is the first in a long line of versions of 'Romeo and Juliet' to have Juliet (here Lavinia) wake just before Romeo (Otway's Marius Junior) dies, allowing for a last desperate love scene together. It was natural for Nicholas Rowe, writing emotionally affecting tragedies centred on the sufferings of women in Otway's wake, to announce on the title-page that 'The Tragedy of Jane Shore' (1714) was 'written in Imitation of Shakespeare's Style', the same phrase that Dryden had used on the title-page of 'All for Love'. 
Rowe's play was written after his most significant engagement with Shakespeare. In 1709 Jacob Tonson published a six-volume edition of Shakespeare edited by Rowe, the first major attempt to re-edit Shakespeare since the first folio. Tonson had acquired shares in the copyright of many Shakespeare plays in 1707 as part of his self-definition as the pre-eminent publisher of the major works of English literature. The copyright remained with the firm until 1767 and the line of Shakespeare editions it published were reworkings and remarketings of the firm's property. In 1709 Shakespeare was the first in a series of English dramatists -- followed by Congreve, Beaumont and Fletcher, Otway, Southerne, and Dryden. Tonson chose Rowe as editor, presumably because an eminent dramatist was the appropriately sympathetic figure to edit the plays. 
Rowe modernized Shakespeare's spelling and punctuation, continuing a process begun in the later folios. But he was not a Shakespeare editor in a modern sense: though he knew there were textual problems with lines and scenes absent from the fourth folio (his copy-text) and needing to be supplied, he made such 'corrections' only in a fairly haphazard way, for example by printing the prologue to 'Romeo and Juliet', found in a quarto, at the end of the play. He emended some clear errors introduced by compositors, and one or two that he perceived as Shakespeare's own (in 'Troilus', for example, the anachronistic reference to 'Aristotle' (II.ii, l. 165) was altered to 'graver Sages'). More significantly, Rowe supplied lists of characters and regularized all the plays into five acts, completing a process begun in the first folio and entirely absent from the quartos. For some he also included scene divisions. 
Rowe also added a number of scene locators, identifying where the play was set, often at the head of each scene. Many locations he borrowed from contemporary adaptations, so that Shakespeare's plays now appeared as if they were contemporary dramas. Rowe's locations cast a long shadow: Shakespeare's Lear is never out on a heath; Rowe borrowed the placing from Tate's version. 
Although less elaborate than other Tonson editions, Rowe's Shakespeare was presented with illustrations, one per play, often derived from contemporary stagings, the first images to appear in print for most of the plays. Rowe also wrote the first substantial Shakespeare biography, 'Some account of the life', prefixed to the first volume, based on a few facts, more legends, and some material that Thomas Betterton had gathered in his 'Veneration for the memory of 'Shakespear'' ('Works', ed. Rowe, 1.xxxiv). Rowe's Shakespeare is a gentleman like Rowe himself, while his friends in retirement are other 'Gentlemen of the Neighbourhood' (ibid., xxxvi). Rowe's decision to include this short biography was based on his recognition that biographical curiosity is 'very Natural' and 'may sometimes conduce to the better understanding' of an author, even if Shakespeare's works 'may seem to many not to want a Comment' (ibid., ii). The hesitancy over the usefulness of a biography of Shakespeare for understanding the plays would be repeated many times in subsequent centuries. 
Tonson retained the extra apocryphal plays added to the third folio but he excluded the poems. They were printed in an extra volume by a rival publisher, Edmund Curll, formatted to match Tonson's plays and edited by Charles Gildon partly from Benson's 1640 text. Gildon also contributed by far the longest critical account of Shakespeare's plays yet to have appeared, carefully evaluating Shakespeare by classical precepts and assuming his pre-eminence among English dramatists. 
In the subsequent years the pile of editions and of critical writings on Shakespeare began to grow apace. John Dennis's 'Essay upon the Genius and Writings of Shakespeare' (1712), probably the first critical work devoted entirely to Shakespeare, was an extension of his other writing on Shakespeare and his experience as an unsuccessful adapter of 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. Shakespeare was discussed more often than any other literary figure in Steele's periodical 'The Tatler', his finest passages identified and praised, his works harnessed to the defence of English writing against French, his plays alluded to and assumed to be known to Steele's readership. 
Rowe revised his edition in 1714 but the whole text was re-edited by Alexander Pope and published in 1725. Pope undertook rather more careful collation of different texts, but his concern was to make contemporary readers appreciate the best passages, marking them with marginal quotation marks and providing a convenient index to them. This fragmenting of the dramas into convenient poetical passages continued in the excerpting of Shakespeare in William Dodd's 'The Beauties of Shakespeare' (1752), a lasting anthology that for many, including Goethe, provided an introduction to Shakespeare. Pope also relegated to the foot of the page any passages he decided were weak, especially Shakespeare's increasingly unacceptable puns and conceits. For Pope, Shakespeare was 'the fairest and fullest subject for Criticism, and to afford the most numerous, as well as most conspicuous instances, both of Beauties and Faults of all sorts' ('The Works of Shakespear', ed. A. Pope, 6 vols., 1725, 1.i). The plays could be regarded as 'an ancient majestick piece of 'Gothick' Architecture, compar'd with a neat Modern building' (ibid., xxiii). 
While Pope could consult twenty-seven texts for his edition, a sign of the growing libraries of Shakespeare which individuals were beginning to accumulate, Lewis Theobald listed forty-three. Theobald, who had attacked the defects of Pope's edition in 'Shakespeare Restored' (1726), published his own in 1733, bringing to Shakespeare the methods of classical and biblical editorial theory and commentary. Careful collation and judicious emendation needed, for Theobald, considerable intellectual skill, though his mockery of Pope's failings only immortalized him as the hero of 'The Dunciad' (1728). Theobald also published 'The Double Falsehood', his stage adaptation of what he claimed to be the Shakespeare-Fletcher 'Cardenio'. 
More editions followed: Hanmer's opulent one published in Oxford in 1744, Warburton's wilful version for the Tonsons in 1747, Dr Johnson's thoughtful account first outlined in his 'Proposals' (1756) and adumbrated throughout his edition (1765) with its preface attempting to defend Shakespeare's generic hybrids against neo-classical orthodoxies. For Johnson, it is Shakespeare's depiction of 'general nature' that overrides local breaches of decorum and Shakespeare, 'the poet of nature', is more vital and more human, showing 'human sentiments in human language' (S. Johnson, 'Preface to his Edition of Shakespear's Plays', 1765, viii, xii). Johnson may blame Shakespeare for his faults, especially his fascination with puns ('the fatal Cleopatra', ibid., xxiii-xxiv), and he may find the tragedies at times laboured, resulting in 'meanness, tediousness and obscurity' (ibid., xxi), but for Johnson Shakespeare is the central figure in British culture and language, as the enormous number of citations in Johnson's 'Dictionary' shows. 
Other kinds of Shakespeare criticism also started to appear: Charlotte Lennox brought together many of Shakespeare's sources with a commentary in 'Shakespeare Illustrated' (1753-4); Lord Kames made Shakespeare the example of genius as part of his exploration of moral aesthetics in 'Elements of Criticism' (1762); Richard Farmer offered careful consideration of Shakespeare's classical learning (1767); Elizabeth Griffith explored 'The Morality of Shakespeare's Drama' (1775); Maurice Morgann's 'Essay on the Dramatic Character of Sir John Falstaff' (1777) turned from the nature of a single character, widely admired as Shakespeare's crowning achievement, to the nature of Shakespeare's art; Samuel Ayscough's 'Index' (1790) was the first reasonably systematic concordance to Shakespeare. Cumulatively it adds up to the development of a critical industry focused on Shakespeare, making his work both a centre of attention and a means of evaluating other concerns, whether moral, aesthetic, or theoretical. But it also defines a literary culture within which the recognition and just evaluation of Shakespeare's worth was increasingly seen as a central emblem of the culture's refinement and taste. 
All was, however, still based on the achievements of successive editors. George Steevens reprinted a group of quartos in their original spelling in 1766. Edward Capell was the first to resist the random attempts of his predecessors by an assiduous and accurate collation of early texts, coupled with cautious emendation, resulting in a finely printed text (published in 1768) with brief textual notes. Capell's modesty contrasted with the increasing grandeur of the editions, building on Johnson's, which Steevens published in 1773 and subsequently expanded, with increasingly lengthy introductions, the text vanishing beneath the accumulated notes of editors and the whole a colossal display of the editors' learning. 
Edmond Malone's immense achievement was the discovery of numerous records of Shakespeare's life, of the stage conditions of early modern theatres, and of textual materials, the synthesis of this vast archival research into new and remarkable accounts of the chronology of Shakespeare's plays (first published in 1780) and of Shakespeare's biography, and the application in his editing of a scrupulous textual analysis. This was most visible in his ten-volume edition of 1790, the first to include the poems, which was expanded into twenty-one volumes by James Boswell in 1821. Malone's work is the culmination of eighteenth-century editing and the foundation for all subsequent editing to the present, an extraordinary scholarly success. But it is also the sign of the literary icon and library figure that Shakespeare, in this major thread in his afterlife, had become. 
By contrast with such scholarship, there was another strand of new editions reflecting performance. Adaptations continued to be written and printed but the theatrical texts, the versions of the plays that were being used with comparatively little adaptation, were also being published. In 1773-4 John Bell printed the first complete works to represent the acting editions 'Regulated from the Prompt Books of each House'. The introductions and commentary by Francis Gentleman identify the theatres' cuts (to deal with the problem of length) and the embarrassing indecencies -- aspects of the plays which scholarly editing could play down, but which were glaringly visible in public performance. Later printings by Bell included a number of illustrations, strikingly unlike the fictional scenes in Theobald's or Hanmer's editions, now showing the characters by imaging the actors and actresses who played them. 
The icon that scholarly editors celebrated had himself become increasingly visible elsewhere. In 1735 a bust of Shakespeare was included in the new Temple of British Worthies in Viscount Cobham's garden at Stowe. Money was raised by benefit performances of 'Julius Caesar' and 'Hamlet' for a more important project: the erection of a statue of Shakespeare in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. Peter Scheemakers's statue, showing Shakespeare leaning on a plinth, was unveiled in 1741. The blank sheet to which Shakespeare was pointing was much mocked and later filled with a misquotation from 'The Tempest'. Frequently reproduced, including in the late twentieth century on $20 notes, the statue also appeared on stage in 1741, discovered at the end of 'Harlequin Student' at Goodman's Fields Theatre, the untheatrical monument now appropriated for performance. On one occasion, the Harlequin was played by David Garrick. 
Nothing that happened in Shakespeare performance in the first half of the eighteenth century quite anticipated the effect of Garrick's arrival. Many Shakespeare plays were established as the backbone of the theatrical repertory: by 1740 nearly a quarter of all London performances were of Shakespeare. There were great actors: for instance, Robert Wilks as Hamlet, Barton Booth as Othello, or James Quin as Falstaff. There was the advocacy of the Shakespeare Ladies' Club which from 1736 successfully pressed for the restoration of more of Shakespeare's plays to the stage. The elevation of Shakespeare to the embodiment of nation meant that adaptation became increasingly seen as unpatriotic: as William Guthrie wondered in 1747, 'Where is the Briton so much a Frenchman to prefer the highest stretch of modern improvement to the meanest spark of Shakespeare's genius?' (W. Guthrie, 'An Essay upon English Tragedy', 1747, 10). 
Although many adaptations were still performed, the comedies, in particular, began to be played unadapted and admired: Charles Macklin's Shylock was praised, perhaps by Pope, as 'This is the Jew / That Shakespeare drew' (Bate and Jackson, 66) because, not least, it was Shakespeare's Shylock, not that of Lansdowne's 1701 adaptation, and Macklin played the role from 1740 to 1789. 
But Garrick's triumph as Richard III in 1741 changed much. Painted by William Hogarth, one of the growing number of paintings which now sought to represent Shakespeare in performance, Garrick's Richard startled through its power and modernity. Garrick, the most frequently painted figure of the century, was often portrayed in Shakespearian roles in great works by Zoffany, Fuseli, Wilson, and others, adding to the expanding store of visual images of Shakespeare. Throughout his long career, Garrick sought to put more and more of Shakespeare's text back into performance, even while adapting it; his version of 'Hamlet' in 1772 was reviled for eliminating almost all of act V but the cuts left space to restore much elsewhere. Shakespeare was, as Garrick wrote, borrowing from 'Romeo', 'the god of my idolatry' (Bate and Jackson, 71), a divinity emphasized by his erection of a temple in the garden of his villa on the Thames with a statue by Roubiliac. On Garrick's death the statue was bequeathed to the British Museum and now stands at the entrance of the British Library. Garrick also left to the museum his large collection of plays, a resource which he freely lent to Capell, Steevens, and other Shakespeare scholars. 
Garrick's advocacy of Shakespeare was not always triumphant: his adaptation of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' with George Colman was a failure in 1763 and he was unable to restore the tragic ending of 'King Lear'. Other adaptations, especially his 'Catherine and Petruchio' (from 'Shrew') and 'Florizel and Perdita' (from 'The Winter's Tale'), performed as a double bill in 1756, fared better. His Romeo was less passionate than Spranger Barry's, performed at Covent Garden head to head with Garrick's at Drury Lane in 1750, but Garrick's adaptation with its grand funeral scene for Juliet and dying reunion of the lovers was a lasting success. In every role Garrick was minutely examined by the audience; the high points of his performances, especially as Hamlet, Macbeth, and Lear, were seen as overwhelming in the force and range of the emotions he explored. Garrick's dominance was also Shakespeare's and the two were as intertwined in the culture as in the lines on Garrick's Westminster Abbey monument, 'Shakespeare and Garrick like twin stars shall shine', or the comment in a 1752 pamphlet, 'Shakespeare revives! In Garrick breathes again!' (Dobson, 168). 
Garrick's most expensive and vulnerable act of homage to Shakespeare was the Stratford jubilee of 1769, his response to Stratford upon Avon's flattery. The event lasted three days, including a masked ball, fireworks, concerts, processions, and a horse race. There was no performance of a Shakespeare play, only of Arne's sacred oratorio 'Judith'. The crowning event was Garrick's ode; answering a planted heckling speech complaining that Shakespeare was a provincial nobody, it spoke of Shakespeare's immortality and national significance, his exploration of nature, and his local roots. The success of the ode, which praised Shakespeare as 'The bard of all bards', in combination with Garrick's use in it of the phrase 'The god of our idolatry' from 'Romeo', did much to establish, if not to create, the notion of Shakespeare as a bard to be worshipped by bardolators. 
Although rain washed out much of the celebrations, Garrick recouped his losses by staging his brief play 'The Jubilee' at Drury Lane the next season, ending with a long procession of nineteen groups of Shakespeare's characters and a copy of the Shakespeare statue. Garrick's jubilee transformed the social significance of Stratford, putting the quiet town on the national map as Shakespeare's home. Its veneration of Shakespeare emblematized the semi-divine status Shakespeare now held. It also helped Garrick's own reputation considerably. 
While much of the emphasis on Shakespeare's importance was, throughout the eighteenth century, based on his image as virile symbol of the nation, Garrick had tried to persuade French friends to admire the plays. The history of Shakespeare performance outside England starts surprisingly early, with performances of 'Hamlet' and 'Richard II' in 1607 and 1608 on a ship becalmed off Sierra Leone for an audience of the ship's company and, for 'Hamlet', four African spectators. The performances were permitted, wrote Captain Keeling, 'to keep my people from idleness and unlawful games, or sleep' (I. Kamps and J. G. Singh, 'Travel Knowledge', 2001, 220). 
Troupes of English actors touring central Europe (especially Germany and Poland) in the seventeenth century performed short plays, some of which were based on Shakespeare. Initially performing in English, the companies began to include local actors and perform in German. One group performed a 'Hamlet' play in Dresden in 1626, though possibly not Shakespeare's. By the later seventeenth century a German company was playing a version of 'Hamlet' called 'Der bestrafte Brudermord' ('Fratricide punished'), about one-fifth the length of Shakespeare's, with the complexities of action, language, and thought ironed flat into a linear, exciting, and conventionally moral drama. There were versions of 'Titus Andronicus' (published in German in 1620), 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (written 'c'.1657), 'The Merchant of Venice' (perhaps as early as 1611), and others. The English comedians had a profound effect on German theatre, in some respects creating a theatre culture where there had been none, and their repertory influenced the development of a vernacular drama. 
In the eighteenth century German translations began to appear. The first, 'Julius Caesar' in alexandrines by von Borck in 1741, prompted Lessing's defence of Shakespeare's compatibility with neo-classicism. Lessing's importance led to something approaching a German cult of Shakespeare, aided by Christoph Wieland's prose translations of twenty-two plays (1762-6). Wieland also put on 'The Tempest' in Biberach in 1761, the first German production of an 'original' Shakespeare play. Shakespeare rapidly became a rallying cry for avant-garde writers: Herder's praise affected the young Goethe and Schiller, both of whom wrote early plays which were distinctly Shakespearian in ambition. In 1771 Goethe's speech 'On Shakespeare's day', at a domestic version of Garrick's jubilee, eloquently praised Shakespeare. 
In Hamburg in 1776, where Lichtenberg's excited descriptions of Garrick's acting in Shakespeare had been published, Friedrich Schroder produced and starred in 'Hamlet', the first of ten Shakespeare plays staged there by 1780, with his 'King Lear', closer to Shakespeare than Tate's, particularly admired. Germany's obsession with 'Hamlet' reached one climax in Goethe's 'Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship' (1795-6), a novel dominated by the play and whose hero performs the role. 
In France the process was more complex. Voltaire saw Shakespeare plays performed in England in the late 1720s, translated parts of 'Hamlet' (printed 1733), and praised Shakespeare's 'monstrous farces' as signs of his 'genius full of... naturalness, and sublimity, without the least spark of good taste and without the slightest knowledge of the rules' (J. Jusserand, 'Shakespeare in France under the Ancien Regime', 1899, 208). His own plays were based closely on Shakespearian models. But later in life he condemned Shakespeare outright, especially 'Hamlet' which was, as Arthur Murphy translated it in 1753 while trying to defend Shakespeare against Voltaire's onslaught, 'a barbarous piece, abounding with such gross absurdities that it would not be tolerated by the vulgar of 'France' and Italy' (Vickers, 4.91). 
Some scenes from 'Hamlet' were published by Pierre-Antoine de la Place in 1746 and a complete translation of the plays by Pierre Le Tourneur appeared in 1776-82. But the plays were slower to reach the stage, though Jean-Francois Ducis's neo-classical adaptations of 'Hamlet' and five others between 1769 and 1792 were all performed at the Comedie-Francaise. 
In Russia there were versions of 'Hamlet' (by Sumarokov, 1750), of 'Merry Wives' (by Catherine the Great, 1786), and a translation of 'Julius Caesar' (by Karamzin, 1787). There was an Italian 'Julius Caesar' published in 1756 and a version there of Ducis's 'Hamlet' performed in 1774, while a Spanish version was staged in 1772. King Stanislaus of Poland translated 'Caesar' into French, while a Czech 'Macbeth' was staged in 1786. By the end of the eighteenth century Shakespeare was being translated and performed, praised and attacked across almost the whole of Europe. Whatever ambivalent responses his plays provoked, they could not be ignored. 
In England, too, by this point, Shakespeare's plays were part of the common currency of the culture. Alderman Boydell set up his Shakspeare Gallery in 1789 with scenes from Shakespeare painted by Barry, Fuseli, Northcote, Reynolds, Romney, and others. Boydell was concerned both to expand his print business and to establish a new school of English history painting, combining commerce with cultural and national aspirations. Mocked by many, the gallery was auctioned off in 1805. Its most brilliant critic was the caricaturist James Gillray, whose political cartoons frequently use witty and complex allusions to lines from Shakespeare to make his satiric points, another mark of the extent to which Shakespeare's language had penetrated deep into the culture. 
Shakespearian documents were also valuable enough in both cultural and financial terms to be worth forging. In 1795-6 William Henry Ireland forged poems and letters, legal deeds and receipts, all supposedly written or signed by Shakespeare. He forged manuscripts for 'Hamlet' and 'King Lear' and three complete and hitherto unknown plays, 'Vortigern' (later staged for one night by Sheridan to howls of derision from the audience), 'Henry II', and 'William the Conqueror'. Ireland's father, Samuel, opened his house to display these relics and James Boswell, wholly convinced, knelt before them, giving 'thanks to God that I have lived to see them' (Schoenbaum, 'Records', 129). In 1796 Edmond Malone exposed the forgeries by careful scholarship and William Henry Ireland confessed in print a few years later, though his father died still believing the documents were genuine. 
English Romanticism produced its own particular, immensely powerful and influential versions of Shakespeare. At its greatest, in the criticism of Hazlitt and Coleridge or in the poetry of Keats and Wordsworth, Shelley and Byron, and at its weakest, in their plays, Shakespeare became the touchstone for a new kind of writing, the original genius who embodied the natural rather than the educated, the denier of conventions rather than their slave, the creator of a whole world of characters whose individual consciousnesses explored the full extent of the human mind. As painters found in Shakespeare possibilities of the imagination with little connection to drama or theatre, so poets saw the plays as poems of the mind, spaces of thought and feeling with a kind of power that was unequalled. In 1811 Charles Lamb argued that 'King Lear' should not be staged, not only because of the adapters' changes but also because 'while we read it, we see not Lear, but we are Lear, -- we are in his mind' (Bate, 'Romantics', 123); for Lamb, reading allowed emotions of delight and terror that staging never could. 
Significantly, while continuing the previous generations' praise of 'Hamlet', the poets raised 'King Lear' to a new position of accomplishment, Hazlitt, Coleridge, and Shelley explicitly identifying it as Shakespeare's greatest achievement. It was also a play that could be engaged with only in reading, for performances were still of versions derived from Tate. Hazlitt's praise of what he saw as Shakespeare's sympathy with all his characters affected Keats (who heard Hazlitt lecture), who developed his own theory of Shakespeare's 'negative capability'; this was a chameleon quality in which Shakespeare became the ideal of that protean creator with no identity of his own that Keats aspired to be. Coleridge's poetry was the proof of the admiration for Shakespeare he later expressed in his criticism, which survives only in the form of random comments and reports of his lectures. Brilliant in its perception (for instance in his description of one of Iago's soliloquies as 'the motive-hunting of a motiveless malignity'; Bate, 'Romantics', 485) and with a continually startling originality, Coleridge's criticism shows the depth of a great poet's engagement with the complexity of Shakespeare. 
All the Romantic poets found themselves, whether they wished or not, deeply influenced by Shakespeare, endlessly alluding to his plays as the ultimate poetic authority for their own writing, defining Shakespeare's genius as their crucial forerunner. If Wordsworth was prepared to criticize Shakespeare, he also embedded him into his attempts at drama like 'The Borderers' (1796-7) and in the quotations and references found throughout 'The Prelude' and in the rest of his work. It was a conflict of public rejection and poetic acceptance that was also to be pervasively characteristic of Byron who, even as he mockingly rejected Shakespeare as 'the 'worst' of models', praised him as 'the most extraordinary of writers' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', ed. L. Marchand, 12 vols., 1973-82, 8.152). Byron's comedy in 'Don Juan', as much as his tragedy in plays like 'Manfred', is profoundly and openly indebted to Shakespeare, whose work pervades every aspect of Byron's writing. 
If English Romanticism's responses to Shakespeare were not primarily directed at the stage, they were responsive to it. Late eighteenth-century Shakespeare theatre production was dominated by John Philip Kemble and his sister Sarah Siddons. Her awesome power as Lady Macbeth, especially in the sleepwalking scene, and as Queen Katherine in 'Henry VIII' astonished, terrified, and moved audiences. Her preparation for the former, copying a sleepwalker she had seen and trying to find an imaginative sympathy with the character, fed her representation of a dark sublime. 
Kemble was most praised for the nobility of his performances, for an aristocratic hauteur that was the essence of a high classical style -- hence his success as Shakespeare's Roman heroes. His 'Coriolanus', his own adaptation that used Shakespeare heavily cut for the first three acts and then interwove Shakespeare's play with James Thomson's adaptation (1749), was emphatically in favour of the hero. As a political reading of the play -- and Shakespeare was continually being co-opted into contemporary politics as authority and allusion, adaptation and interpretation allowed opposing appropriations of the plays -- Kemble's 'Coriolanus' disturbed Hazlitt whose liberal politics were at the other pole from this conservative reading. Shakespeare's play, placed in the intersection of theatre, criticism, and contemporary political events, became the site across which politics could be contested. 
When Kemble rebuilt Covent Garden Theatre after a fire and raised prices, the resulting riots in 1809 (which lasted sixty-seven nights and which ended only with Kemble's capitulation to the rioters' demands) were a matter of class and power, an argument that Shakespeare belonged to the whole nation, not solely to the aristocratic or the rich. The theatre itself became the place where the tensions of the society could be fully exposed, but Shakespeare as the national bard was the property that was being contested and through him the rights of citizens of that nation. This sense of Shakespeare's presence in the culture is typified, though from a perspective far from that of the rioters, by Henry Crawford's comments in Jane Austen's 'Mansfield Park' (1814): 'But Shakespeare one gets acquainted with without knowing how. It is a part of an Englishman's constitution... one is intimate with him by instinct.' 
Against the traditional authority of Kemble were placed the productions of the illegitimate theatres. Their burlesques and travesties, like John Poole's 'Hamlet Travestie' (New Theatre, 1811), were a continuation of the eighteenth century's use of Shakespeare as a resource for parody and mockery of contemporary theatre and politics. It was a rich tradition with wonderfully comic work by Charles Selby, Francis Talfourd, William and Robert Brough, and F. C. Burnand, stretching at least as far as W. S. Gilbert's 'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern' (staged 1891). But the battle between the patent houses, Kemble's Covent Garden and the rival Drury Lane, was also fought out as a conflict of styles: Kemble's patrician classicism against the new style of Edmund Kean, who from his Drury Lane debut in 1814 was the very embodiment of a radical, natural, and emotional force. Kean electrified audiences and destroyed Kemble's authority. Often drunk on stage, full of sexual energy (regularly having sex with a prostitute before and in the intervals of his performances), Kean could be bad as well as brilliant: Coleridge's praise of him as 'like reading Shakspeare ['sic'] by flashes of lightning' is not necessarily a compliment (Bate, 'Romantics', 160). But Kean's was the kind of acting that Romanticism sought. 
In the battles of European Romanticism, Shakespeare played a crucial part. August Wilhelm Schlegel's criticism was effective but it was his translation of the plays (1797-1810), later completed by Ludwig Tieck and Tieck's daughter Dorothea, which defined German responses to Shakespeare thereafter. The subtlety of the translations' attempts to capture form as well as meaning, their close links to the style of contemporary German drama, and the ways in which they extended the possibilities of German dramatic verse all made Shakespeare's plays central to German thought and poetry. German Romanticism appropriated Shakespeare and made him its own. 
French Romanticism was, by contrast, directly influenced by the cross-channel movement of the theatre company of Charles Kemble, John Philip's brother. In 1823 in 'Racine et Shakespeare' Stendhal defined Shakespeare as the vital source for a modern drama. In 1827 Victor Hugo argued in the preface to his play 'Cromwell' that 'Shakespeare, c'est le Drame' ('Shakespeare 'is' drama', quoted in Bate, 'Genius', 231). Hugo's commitment to Shakespeare underscores his play 'Hernani', whose premiere in 1830 was the battleground and triumph of French Romantic drama. His son, Francois-Victor, completed a prose translation of all Shakespeare's works in 1865 and Victor Hugo contributed a long preface, later published separately (in English, French, and German) for the tercentenary of Shakespeare's birth in 1864 and dedicated to England. Hugo's was for long the standard literary translation, though never used in production. 
In 1827, the year of Hugo's 'Cromwell', Charles Kemble's company performed 'Hamlet' in Paris to an audience which included all the major figures of the French Romantic movement. An extraordinary success, the production overwhelmed Dumas 'pere' (who wrote later 'I recognised at last that [Shakespeare] was the man who had created most after God'; 'Theatre complet', 1863-5, 1.15), Eugene Delacroix (who created over the next thirty years a series of powerful lithographs of scenes from the play), and Berlioz (who would later marry Kemble's Ophelia, Harriet Smithson). 
Berlioz's greatest music was from then on often explicitly Shakespearian: from the 'Fantasy on 'The Tempest'' in 'Lelio' (op. 14b, 1830), his overture to 'King Lear' (op. 4, 1831), and his dramatic symphony 'Romeo et Juliette' (op. 17, 1839) to his quotations from 'The Merchant of Venice' for the love scene in 'Les Troyens' (1856-8) or the adaptation of 'Much Ado about Nothing' as the opera 'Beatrice et Benedict' (1860-62). 
If Berlioz is more completely a Shakespearian composer than any other, there was throughout the nineteenth century hardly a major composer who did not at some point write a Shakespeare-influenced piece: Mendelssohn's overture to 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' was composed for the concert hall in 1826, with the rest of his incidental music written for the stage in 1843; Schubert wrote songs with Shakespeare texts in 1826; Liszt wrote his 'Hamlet' symphonic poem first in 1858 (later revised); Tchaikovsky composed fantasy overtures to 'Romeo and Juliet' (1869) and 'Hamlet' (1888) and a fantasia on 'The Tempest' (1873). Full-scale operas range from Salieri's 'Falstaff' (1799) and Rossini's 'Otello' (1816, revised 1819 with a happy ending) to Wagner's 'Das Liebesverbot' (1836), from 'Measure for Measure', Nicolai's 'Die lustigen Weiber von Windsor' (1849), and Ambroise Thomas's 'Hamlet' (Paris, 1868). The three greatest nineteenth-century Shakespeare operas are Verdi's 'Macbeth' (1847, revised 1865), 'Otello' (1887), and 'Falstaff' (1893), the last in its exuberance and intelligence fully equal to its source (and for some critics even greater than 'Merry Wives'). There are also the fascinating unwritten projects like Mozart's 'Tempest' and Verdi's 'King Lear'. If initially Shakespeare is no more than a convenient source for a dramatic plot or a romantic mood, he comes to be the literary figure with whom composers must engage: Verdi's 'Macbeth' has far less of an imaginative interaction with the full range of Shakespeare's text than his works forty and fifty years later. 
Throughout Europe, writers, like composers, worked under the heavy influence, liberating and constricting by turns, of Shakespeare's presence. Shakespeare could enable new national forms of drama: in Russia, for instance, Pushkin's 'Boris Godunov' (1825) used Shakespeare's characterization and his approach to historical drama as its model. He could make possible political attack: in Germany Freiligrath used Hamlet's indecision as the stick with which to beat the political pusillanimity of the German intelligentsia in his poem 'Germany is Hamlet' (1844), a reaction to the pro- 'Hamlet' attitude after Goethe's celebration of the introspective hero. He could be the source for wholly new styles of writing: Horace Walpole's 'The Castle of Otranto' (1765), the instigator of the Gothic novel, was explicit in its Shakespearian method and its mood (derived especially from 'Macbeth' and 'Hamlet'), as one of its successors, Lewis's 'The Monk' (1796) depended on 'Measure for Measure'; Sir Walter Scott's effective invention of the historical novel, starting with 'Waverley' (1814), depended on a transformation of the range of concerns of Shakespeare's histories into narrative fiction, a metamorphosis sustained by frequent quotation and allusion. Scott could also fictionalize Shakespeare's life: in 'Kenilworth' (1821) the chronology is so deliberately confused that in the age of Elizabeth people quote from Shakespeare's last plays, written a decade after the queen's death. 
In England in particular, as for Walpole and Scott, the novel was the form in which the nineteenth century's imaginative engagements with Shakespeare were most powerfully present. Charlotte Bronte's 'Shirley' (1849) deepens its analysis of industrial relations in the context of the Luddite riots in the Napoleonic era through a web of references to 'Coriolanus'. For George Eliot, described as 'the female Shakespeare' (Taylor, 208), Shakespeare's writing was at times unacceptable (the ending of 'Two Gentlemen of Verona' was impossible for her) and writing his biography was a task she turned down. But his work was also a means of defining her concerns all the more clearly. In 'Daniel Deronda' (1876), for instance, the interplay between Gwendolen Harleth's re-creation of Rosalind in 'As You Like It' and Deronda's 'Hamlet'-influenced irresolution allows a tension between the plays to reflect the novel's antithesis of realism and Romanticism. 
Charles Dickens, who knew Shakespeare as an actor and theatre critic as well as a reader, was unable to write a novel without extensive use of Shakespeare. Benign mockery of provincial Shakespeare production like Crummles's 'Romeo and Juliet' in 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1839), a novel Dickens dedicated to the great actor-manager Macready, can be more troubling when Mr Wopsle performs 'Hamlet' in 'Great Expectations' (1861), a novel full of fathers missing, pretending, and returning. Every Dickens novel has a wealth of Shakespeare allusions and quotations, with characters and events demanding to be read against Shakespearian models, amounting in all to many hundreds of references. In some cases, a novel seems especially engaged with a particular play: 'Dombey and Son' is permeated by references to 'Macbeth', both as a narrative of children and childlessness and as a drama of melodramatic murder. 
Dickens's view of the world was focused through Shakespearian lenses. It is almost as if it is through Shakespeare's characters and action that Dickens saw, thought, and felt. But Shakespeare's presence also pervades much high Victorian poetry and painting, from Tennyson's 'Mariana' and Browning's 'Caliban upon Setebos' to the work of the pre-Raphaelites, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Holman Hunt, and John Everett Millais. 
Some attitudes to Shakespeare elsewhere in nineteenth-century society came from quite other needs. Shakespeare's plays needed to be changed to make them accessible to children and acceptable for families. Charles and Mary Lamb produced their 'Tales from Shakespeare' in 1807 (mostly written by Mary), turning the plays into placidly and even at times sentimentally moral stories that were also designed to free children's (and especially young girls') imaginations by their encounters with the worlds of the plays. Their versions have never been out of print since and have formed the first encounters with Shakespeare for many generations of children. 
But if Shakespeare's plays themselves were to be part of family reading they needed censoring. The Lambs recommended that young boys should read passages from Shakespeare's 'manly book' to their sisters after 'carefully selecting what is proper for a young sister's ear' (Taylor, 207). Henrietta Bowdler's edition of twenty plays in 1807 'endeavoured to remove every thing that could give just offence to the religious and virtuous mind' to produce a text that could be given to boys and girls. 'The Family Shakespeare' was completed by her brother, the Revd Thomas Bowdler, in 1818. The cutting and rewritings produced plays that were safe. Both the Lambs' and the Bowdlers' work sold slowly at first but more successfully as the century continued and their values seemed appropriate. 
Other kinds of edition were needed as well. The new technologies made cheap Shakespeare possible for nearly all: a complete Shakespeare could be sold for a shilling and other editions were published in penny issues. Shakespeare could become a part of everyone's library alongside the 'Bible' (often the only two books in working-class homes). Other editions were more expensive but were attractive for their extensive illustrations. Charles Knight produced a long series of illustrated texts; his 'Pictorial Shakespeare' (1838-41) sold in weekly parts before being available in bound volumes. Staunton's edition was first published at a shilling a play (1856-8) but there were 831 images by Sir John Gilbert. For the wealthy and for scholars, there could now be facsimiles of early texts: a photographic reproduction of the first folio was published in 1866 and the publication of photolitho quarto facsimiles began in 1858. 
Scholars were also helped by the 'Globe Edition' (1863-6), edited by William Clark, William Wright, and John Glover. Their work, the first to be edited by academics, became known as the 'Cambridge Shakespeare'. Its significance lay not only in its careful collations (an extension of Malone's earlier work) and its reprinting of early quartos but also in its inclusion of line numbers, the first version to make referring to a particular line easy and accurate. Abbott's 'A Shakespearian Grammar' (1869), Schmidt's 'Shakespeare-Lexicon' (1874-5), and Bartlett's accurate complete concordance (1894) provided further important reference works for Shakespeare study. For Shakespeare was now being studied: from 1868 Clark and Wright edited a series of the plays for the Clarendon Press 'to meet the wants of Students in English Literature'; Abbott included questions to test students' understanding of the rules of grammar and prosody. A. W. Verity's 'Pitt Press Shakespeare' (from 1893) and the 'Warwick Shakespeare' served generations of schoolchildren through much of the twentieth century. As English literature emerged as a new and major subject for study at university, and schools also placed literature as a central requirement of children's education, so Shakespeare became the centre of an educational system both in Britain and across the British empire. 
There were new ways of gathering to talk about Shakespeare, or to listen to lectures, or to preserve the Shakespeare heritage. The Shakespearian Club was founded in Stratford upon Avon in 1824, becoming the Royal Shakespeare Club from 1830 to 1874. Halliwell-Phillipps founded the scholarly Shakespeare Society in 1840 and Furnivall created its successor, the New Shakespeare Society, in 1873. The first major national Shakespeare society was the Deutsche Shakespeare-Gesellschaft, founded in 1864 and a sign of the immense importance of Shakespeare in Germany and of German Shakespeare scholarship to the growth of Shakespeare studies. Its journal 'Shakespeare Jahrbuch' began publication in 1865. 
The Royal Shakespeare Club had helped the campaign to purchase Shakespeare's birthplace as a national monument in 1847. The Shakespeare Birthplace Trust was formed soon afterwards, acquiring other houses over the years (for example, New Place and Nash's House in 1862, Anne Hathaway's Cottage in 1892) -- Stratford had for some time been a place of pilgrimage, with Keats and Scott among the 700 a year visiting the birthplace and/or the grave. The visible material heritage of Shakespeare, redefined as houses associated with his family and his life rather than the theatres he wrote for or indeed the books he wrote, was now preserved for the world's visitors -- and their piety superbly mocked by Henry James in his short story 'The Birthplace' (1903). 
In 1864 the tercentenary of Shakespeare's birth was celebrated in a typically muddled English way. Perhaps the most public Shakespeare event of the century, it involved competing celebrations in Stratford and London, with two committees, the Stratford one dominated by Edward Fordham Flower whose family became central to Shakespeare in Stratford thereafter. The Stratford events, in spite of the piqued 'amour propre' and late withdrawal of the actor Edward Fechter, went well: a banquet for thousands in the specially constructed pavilion, a fancy-dress ball, concerts, two Shakespeare sermons, and even, in contrast to Garrick's 1769 jubilee, performances of and readings from the plays. The National Shakespeare Committee tried chaotically to arrange London's contribution: a tree-planting ceremony on Primrose Hill was mixed up with a demonstration over Garibaldi and came close to a riot; a concert at Crystal Palace was more peaceable. More tangibly, the celebrations led in Stratford ultimately to the opening of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in 1879 and the memorial statues by Sir Ronald Gower of Shakespeare, Hamlet, Lady Macbeth, Prince Henry, and Falstaff that were unveiled in 1888. 
The connection between the tercentenary tree planting and Garibaldi was not an accident. Instead, it demonstrates the centrality of Shakespeare to nineteenth-century radicalism. From the Chartists onwards, Shakespeare was a crucial part of radicals' literary culture. The few details of his life, with the absence of clear links to the court and his modest background, made him the perfect English exemplum of the ordinary man as poetic genius. His plays were widely used in political oratory, especially when cheap editions of them (like the 'Complete Shilling Shakespeare' published by John Thomas Dicks in the 1850s) became available for working-class homes. Reformers read the plays as reformist documents, with his celebration of rural England seen as opposition to enclosures and other forms of dispossession of the rural poor. Shakespeare was identified as a scathing satirist of courts and kings, with plays like 'Julius Caesar' co-opted as tracts against tyranny. Chartist newspapers could carefully document precursors to their own political demands throughout Shakespeare's works. Shakespeare became the people's playwright, with radicals fiercely opposing attempts either to appropriate his politics for Conservatism or to claim aristocrats as the true authors of the plays. In 1864 to celebrate Shakespeare and to demonstrate against the government's supposed expulsion of Garibaldi were naturally connected events for radical politics, part of the reclaiming of Shakespeare from the upper classes and their high culture as a different kind of national poet. 
Within the century's enshrining of Shakespeare as the icon of the nation there were also other voices of opposition, especially the growth of the belief that the plays, acknowledged as masterpieces, could not possibly have been the work of the 'man from Stratford', a mere actor and not a poet (there are shades here of the Romantic glorification of the poet removed from the quotidian world). The idea that someone else had written the plays was said to have been first advanced by the Revd James Wilmot in 1785 (his candidate was reported to have been Francis Bacon) but the lectures that claimed Wilmot held such views, supposedly given by James Corton Cowell in 1805, are now known to be a much later forgery. In 1848 Joseph C. Hart, American consul at Santa Cruz, argued in 'The Romance of Yachting' that the plays were written by university graduates and foisted off as Shakespeare's. In 1856 Delia Bacon claimed that Francis Bacon or a committee headed by him had been responsible. Her ascription was repeated, independently, by William Henry Smith the following year. Many editors from Pope onwards had doubted Shakespeare's responsibility for some speeches, scenes, even whole plays -- but this was a dislodging of Shakespeare from any authorship of any of his work. 
The controversy that followed was energetic. Other candidates emerged, including Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford (proposed by J. Thomas Looney in 1920 and supported by Sigmund Freud), the earl of Rutland (the idea of Peter Alvor in Germany in 1906 and popular there for a while), the earl of Derby (first advanced in 1891 but most strongly in France after 1919), Christopher Marlowe (according to William Ziegler in 1895 and advanced even more strenuously by Calvin Hoffman in 1955), and Queen Elizabeth (George Elliott's proposal in 1956). All these claims surmount the contemporary evidence for Shakespeare by arguing for an early modern conspiracy and often a later one among academics and others to suppress the 'truth'. Many resolve the inconveniently early death of their candidate by arguing for posthumous slow release of the plays. Some indulge in cryptograms of mind-boggling complexity to reveal the hidden 'truth' of their assertions. Some, like Delia Bacon, were or became mad in pursuit of their claims. Marlowe apart, whose literary ability is unquestioned, all depend on assumptions that the plays display knowledge available only to an aristocrat, university educated, well travelled, and a habitue of courts. This snobbery is exemplified by the comment of Christmas Humphreys, an Oxfordian and a barrister, in 1955: 'It is offensive to scholarship, to our national dignity, and to our sense of fair play to worship the memory of a petty-minded tradesman' (Bate, 'Genius', 93). All distort evidence for their own ends. None is remotely convincing to scholars, though many others have been and remain steadfastly sure that Shakespeare could not have written Shakespeare. 
One of the striking things about the advocates of other authors is that many of the staunchest are Americans. Characterized by a nostalgia for an aristocracy lacking in their democracy and by their proneness to accept conspiracy theories, these anti-Stratfordians are part of the wide range of reactions to Shakespeare generated by Americans in the nineteenth century. By the end of the century there were a hundred Shakespeare societies in America, hardly a surprise in a country with at least four towns called Hamlet, three Othellos, three Romeos, two Violas, two Horatios, and an Iago. The ambivalence of the responses is an eloquent testimony to the interaction of writer and nation. For Emerson, who visited England in 1847, Shakespeare was the perfect poet for his list of 'Representative Men' (1850), a genius whose works, half understood in his own time, were fully available only in modern America. Washington Irving's praise of Shakespeare in 1820 was set against his mockery of the Stratford tourist industry where Shakespeare's mulberry tree 'seems to have as extraordinary powers of self-multiplication as the wood of the true cross' (Rawlings, 43). 
Some sought to make Shakespeare an honorary American, like Henry Cabot Lodge, who saw his language as close to current American speech in 1895. Others were vehement that there is nothing unique or English about Shakespeare: Melville argued in 1850 that 'Shakespeares are this day being born on the banks of the Ohio' (Rawlings, 165). Still others, in seeking to displace the authority of England, attacked the authority of Shakespeare: Whitman saw the plays as dangerously anti-democratic and demanded that America discard them and 'see that it is, in itself, the final authority and reliance' (ibid., 283). Some writers showed how Shakespeare had penetrated American popular culture, as in Twain's use of 'Hamlet' and 'Macbeth' in 'Huckleberry Finn' (1885), though Twain was never quite sure if Shakespeare was indeed the plays' author. 
In many respects this variety of response was intriguingly similar to Russia where, after Mochalov's brilliant performance as Hamlet in 1837, 'Hamlet' became as fashionable as throughout much of the rest of Europe, with young men priding themselves on their Hamletism in the wake of the popularity of Goethe's 'Wilhelm Meister'. The 'superfluous man', introspective and self-regarding in his Hamlet-like pose, was attacked as useless egotism by Turgenev, especially in his story 'A Hamlet of Shchigrovsky District' (in 'Sportsman's Sketches', 1852) and his lecture on 'Hamlet and Don Quixote' (1860). It was an attack continued in Dostoyevsky and in Chekhov but none was attacking Shakespeare; rather, the attack was on Russian intellectuals' misappropriation of Shakespeare. Through Shakespeare -- and 'Hamlet' in particular -- different constructions of social responsibility and political engagement could be fought. 
The attack on Shakespeare himself was mounted by Tolstoy in 1906 where the plays, especially 'King Lear', were indicted for poor dramaturgy, ineffective characterization, and, above all, an aristocratic disdain for the common people. Shakespeare is berated, in effect, for failing to be Tolstoy himself. Fanny Burney recorded George III complaining in 1785 'Was there ever... such stuff as a great part of Shakespeare? Only one must not say so!' (Gross, 113). But Tolstoy dared to say so: his are the most violent of all anti-Shakespearian diatribes, rejecting Shakespeare's drama as universally applicable and infinitely malleable. 
Productions in Russia often played Shakespeare to audiences that made immediate political connections, necessitating interventions by censors: Shakespeare was banned in the Ukraine from 1863. Theatres across America, by contrast, often performed Shakespeare with a sense of national pride. The visit of Macready to New York in 1849 resulted in a riot and thirty-one deaths when working-class supporters of Edwin Forrest, the greatest American actor of his time, were encouraged to demonstrate their support for an American actor and against the English visitor and his wealthy American patrons. A number of English stars toured America including George Frederick Cooke and Edmund Kean. American Shakespeare actors toured England, James Hackett making a great success as Falstaff on both sides of the Atlantic for forty years, while the African-American Ira Aldridge starred as Macbeth, Shylock, and Richard III as well as Othello, playing in England and in Russia. 
In the interchange, America experienced all the changes in Shakespeare production being explored in England, as England also encountered European performers like Salvini who played Othello in Italian at Drury Lane in 1875 while the rest of the cast spoke English or Ernesto Rossi who played Hamlet, Lear, Macbeth, and Romeo there in 1876, also speaking Italian. 
Charles Kemble produced 'King John' in 1823 with a designer, James Robinson Planche, commissioned to search for and reproduce historical sources for the play's locations, costumes, and props. It was an extension of the research Charles Macklin undertook for his 'Macbeth' in 1773 but it was at the centre of Victorian Shakespeare in the theatre. The plays, especially the tragedies and histories, became a resource for pictorial splendour with pageantry and stage spectacle, vast sets, and enormous casts of extras, aiming to create on stage the plays as historical narratives. Madame Vestris's ways with the comedies at Covent Garden in the 1840s showed that they too, especially 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1840), could be spectacles of song and ballet. But elsewhere Shakespeare became the means by which history could be seen. As the centrepiece of English cultural history himself, he had become the sure guide to English and Roman history, now attested by the playbills' references to the British Museum as production resource. Attending a Shakespeare production -- and especially looking at a Shakespeare production -- was now an education in itself. Authenticity, not to Shakespeare and the conditions of early modern performance but to the historical reality to which it was a kind of window, was the key and the assumption continued through to the BBC television series of the plays (1978-85), where costuming had to be either early modern or of the historical date of the events Shakespeare dramatized. 
Macready, concerned with raising the theatre's 'low' image, worked hard to redeem its ways with Shakespeare's texts. Restoring Shakespeare to the stage was one means of improving the theatre's cultural image. But he also prepared his productions more carefully than had been the norm, with frequent rehearsals (and long private work on his own performance) as well as thoughtful staging to manifest the historical accuracy of action and ritual as well as set and costumes. In England and America, which he toured three times, his work was highly praised and much imitated. Much hyped, Macready's restoration of the text was less substantial than his publicity promised: though his production of 'King Lear' in 1838 restored Fool, after persuasion, and the tragic ending, never seen since Tate's version was first performed, Macready cut the blinding of Gloucester and his leap at Dover Cliff, the former presumably as too painful, the latter as dangerously close to comic. Macready's 'King Lear' was set in an ancient Britain with signs of Stonehenge; his 'Coriolanus' was in a modest Rome unlike the splendour of his 'Julius Caesar'. But Macready also exploited the stage's technology for grand transformation scenes, for example in the images that backed the Chorus's speeches in his 'Henry V'. 
Charles Kean, the Eton-educated son of the dissolute Edmund, continued the trend in the 1850s at the Princess's Theatre. The productions became ever more populated, the interpolated scenes (for example Bolingbroke's arrival in London and Richard II's leaving it for prison) ever grander, the historical detail ever more obsessive. Kean was proud of being a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and his published texts are full of annotation about historical accuracy -- the same kind of detail that acted as commentary to Charles Knight's illustrated texts. The Chorus to 'Henry V' became Clio, the Muse of History, and the images became 'tableaux vivants' displayed behind a gauze, most famously for Henry's return to London. On stage crowds now numbered 200 or more, a visual representation of the nation (be it Rome or England), all exactly costumed, all demonstrating their historicity. The grand processions that had long been part of productions of, for instance, 'Coriolanus' or 'King Henry VIII' were now inserted wherever space could be made. The effect is, in modern terms, operatic, the text subordinated to the visual. The English style of Shakespeare production influenced and in its turn was influenced by the work of the duke of Saxe-Meiningen's company, with its minutely disciplined crowds, seen in London in 1881. 
Samuel Phelps's productions at Sadler's Wells from 1843 to 1862 made Shakespeare his house dramatist, producing thirty-two of the plays. More of Shakespeare's texts were restored but Phelps, while rarely swamping the play, made the diorama his speciality, allowing scenes to metamorphose into others and for characters to be seen journeying between the locations of scenes. 
All serious productions were subject to intense scrutiny, not only in the increasingly important work of theatre reviewers who -- like Hazlitt earlier, George Lewes in mid-century, and Bernard Shaw, Max Beerbohm, and Henry James at its end -- minutely examined a production's adequacy to their individual views of the plays, but also in the mockery of their excesses in the steady stream of travesties. 
While Henry Irving and Herbert Beerbohm Tree at the end of the century may have had successes with more plays and while their productions may have been even more spectacular, with Irving employing many fine painters to design his sets, and even more historically accurate, with Tree including the signing of 'Magna Carta', a scene Shakespeare inconveniently forgot to include in 'King John', there was little that changed the style of work that Macready, Phelps, and Charles Kean had defined. Grandeur dominated in acting as in design, relieved only rarely by the different virtues of domesticity, with extensive musical scores to accompany the action and long gaps while the huge sets were changed by armies of stagehands. 
The opposition to these theatrical excesses came first from William Poel, who replaced one form of historical authenticity with another in his search to reproduce early modern theatrical conditions, complete with extras dressed as nobles to sit on stage as if members of the audience. His productions were much affected by the discovery of the De Witt drawing of the Swan Theatre: the first reliable depiction of an Elizabethan theatre interior. Mostly working with amateurs and in short runs in non-commercial spaces, Poel after 1881, when he produced 'Hamlet' in first quarto guise, followed his lonely and much-mocked path. More traditionally and less eccentrically, Frank Benson's work, principally at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre from 1886 to 1919, showed how modest ambition in the service of the text could make Shakespeare both popular and pleasurable. 
Edward Gordon Craig, son of Ellen Terry, moved in his theory and practice to a different resistance to the principles of high Victorian spectacular theatre. He explored both abstraction and simplicity, culminating in the use of moveable screens to define space for his 'Hamlet', codirected with Stanislavsky at the Moscow Art Theatre in 1912. Craig's project was explicitly modernist in its assumptions and as startling when underpinning Sally Jacobs's set for Peter Brook's 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (Royal Shakespeare Company, 1970) as when Craig created a church out of light alone for 'Much Ado about Nothing' in 1903. 
Most influential of all was Harley Granville-Barker, who briefly worked with Poel. His productions of 'The Winter's Tale', 'Twelfth Night', and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (with a man as Oberon, fairies with gold-leafed faces, and folk tunes as music) at the Savoy (1912-14) revolutionized production technique. But far more influential were his 'Prefaces to Shakespeare', the first of which appeared in 1923. In their mixture of the scholarly and the practical, combining theatrical awareness with close attention to Shakespeare's dramatic technique, they made directors aware of the virtues of the text and students and scholars aware of the plays as dramas. They marked a new meeting of theatre and scholarship in Shakespeare studies. 
The 'Prefaces' were designed for the mythical general reader but Shakespeare studies were increasingly professional and visibly a growth industry. The archival and bibliographical work of Victorian scholars such as James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps and John Payne Collier, for all the latter's forgeries of documents that might help his arguments (and which continue to confuse scholars), led to further biographical and contextual study. Sidney Lee's work on the many figures surrounding Shakespeare for the 'Dictionary of National Biography' helped his much-reprinted and expanded biography (first published in 1898), based on his dictionary entry. The work of Charles William Wallace (1865-1932) and his wife at the Public Record Office added crucial new fragments of knowledge about Shakespeare's life to offset the continuing strain of biographical speculations by, for instance, Oscar Wilde in his fictional 'A Portrait of Mr W. H.' (1889) or Frank Harris in his supposedly non-fictional 'The Man Shakespeare' (1909). 
But there was also a new kind of biographical enquiry, working from the plays to construct a version of Shakespeare's mind. Edward Dowden's 'Shakspere: a Critical Study of his Mind and Art' (1875) saw the plays as veiled emotional and intellectual autobiography. Caroline Spurgeon's investigation in 'Shakespeare's Imagery and What it Tells Us' (1935) enumerated patterns of images to reveal Shakespeare's own likes and dislikes. 
In the first half of the twentieth century the theatrical research of Sir E. K. Chambers and G. E. Bentley and the bibliographical work of Sir W. W. Greg became cornerstones of highly accomplished academic study, often building on the achievements of Germanic classical and Shakespearian scholarship. For Chambers it led towards distinguished work on Shakespeare's biography. The image-centred criticism of Caroline Spurgeon and the historical contextual work of E. M. W. Tillyard, Wilson Knight's thematic criticism and the interest in the history of ideas by Hardin Craig and Theodore Spencer, the growth of the close reading in 'new criticism' and the work of William Empson, all began major modes of critical interpretative approaches to Shakespeare which profoundly affected the ways the plays were read and taught. 
There were new and major series of editions, building on the earlier accomplishments of Malone and hardly changing the premises of such editing: the American-based 'New Variorum' begun by H. H. Furness in 1871 and continued by his son (and still ongoing); the 'Arden Shakespeare' started with 'Hamlet', edited by Edward Dowden, in 1899 and is now in its third complete series; the 'New Shakespeare', published by Cambridge University Press (1921-66), was edited by Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch and John Dover Wilson, who was responsible for both its most incisive scholarship and some comically excessive invented stage directions. 
Critical interpretations could become best-sellers. In A. C. Bradley's 'Shakespearean Tragedy' (1904), for example, though the plays are treated more like novels or biographies of great men, a new orthodoxy of critical reading was defined. Guy Boas argued wittily in 1926: '
I dreamt last night that Shakespeare's ghost 

Sat for a Civil Service post; 

The English paper for the year 

Had several questions on 'King Lear'


Which Shakespeare answered very badly 

Because he hadn't read his Bradley. 
(Gross, 329)' 

Shakespeare, as a cornerstone of Englishness, was part of many kinds of official examination for future administrators of the empire and his work was vigorously championed by, for instance, the British Empire Shakespeare Society, founded in 1901 to encourage reading circles and costume recitals. In 1912 the 'Shakespeare's England' exhibition at Earl's Court in London, complete with the first-ever replica of the Globe Theatre, celebrated Shakespeare as heritage culture in a display of stirring nationalism. 
The events in 1916 for the tercentenary of Shakespeare's death, an event marked almost as strongly in Germany as in England, included publication of a major collection of essays on Shakespeare's times, 'Shakespeare's England', as well as a Shakespeare day for schools (complete with a Shakespeare prayer) and, as a sign of Shakespeare's international importance, 'A Book of Homage to Shakespeare' edited by Israel Gollancz as secretary of the tercentenary committee, with a poem by Thomas Hardy and with contributions from all corners of the empire carefully placed before those from the rest of the world. Many years later the British Council, as an offshoot of government charged with promoting British culture worldwide, sponsored the Marlowe Society's complete audio recordings of the plays, directed by George Rylands (1958-64), records that functioned as 'official' Shakespeare across the world. 
The countries of the empire often developed complexly ambivalent attitudes towards Shakespeare, seeing him both as the embodiment of their colonial masters and as something enticingly able to be appropriated into other forms, ready to be made a part of indigenous dramatic traditions. In India, for instance, Shakespeare was being performed in Calcutta from the 1780s and in Bombay in the 1850s. There were popular adaptations of Shakespeare's plots into Marathi, Gujarati, and Parsi, each culture finding rich resources for its own styles of popular theatre. Aga Hashr Kashmiri, who adapted many Shakespeare plays into Urdu in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, acquired the nickname 'Shakespeare-e-Hind' ('Shakespeare of India'). Indian rulers often commanded private performances of the plays, for example 'Cymbeline' performed at the wedding of the maharaja of Baroda in 1879. 
English companies toured India (like, later, Geoffrey Kendal's troupe, filmed as 'Shakespeare Wallah' in 1965) and the English residents of the raj put on amateur productions. Schools, educating Indian students in the high cultural forms that the proponents of empire thought would raise them to European standards, staged Shakespeare performances as English schools so regularly did. The opposition was replicated throughout the empire: on the one hand, imitations, often amateur or second-rate, of English styles of Shakespeare production; on the other, energized and vital re-imaginations of Shakespeare into other, local, modes of theatre. 
Colonial and post-colonial responses to Shakespeare, however, often rewrote Shakespeare as a means of reconsidering the relationship of nation to empire. 'The Tempest', often seen as a narrative of colonialism, became in Octave Mannoni's 'Psychology of Colonisation' (1950) the epitome of the process as 'Prospero complex' faced 'Caliban complex'. For many Caribbean writers, like the Barbadian George Lamming in the autobiographical 'The Pleasures of Exile' (1960) and the novel 'Water with Berries' (1971), Aime Cesaire (from Martinique) in his play 'Une tempete' (1968), Edward Brathwaite (from Barbados) in his poem 'Caliban' in 'Islands' (1969), and the Cuban Roberto Retamar in 'Caliban' (1974), exploring the play is the way for them, seeing themselves as Calibans, to identify their own political positioning. 
In this these writers were hardly unusual. Across the world in the twentieth century, whether in parts of the (former) British empire or not, writers found in Shakespeare as potent a way of voicing themselves as had earlier generations, and states found Shakespeare co-opted in opposition to their political oppressions. Throughout the Soviet bloc, for instance, Shakespeare was censored as dangerously subversive, controlled into a political acceptability as an example of socialist realism, or banned, as 'Hamlet' was under Stalin. Some plays began to be admired because praised by Marx (for example, 'Timon of Athens') or Engels (for example, 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'). But writers opposing Sovietism like Blok, Akhmatova, Tsvetaeva, and Pasternak turned to Shakespeare, the last both translating 'Hamlet' and 'King Lear' (used for Grigory Kozintsev's film versions in 1964 and 1971) and making 'Hamlet' the basis of poems in his banned novel 'Doctor Zhivago' (1958). 
Elsewhere, in less oppressive contexts, Shakespeare was being rethought and remade. In Japan, for instance, 'The Merchant of Venice' was played in a Kabuki adaptation in 1885 while the first Japanese translation ('Julius Caesar' by Shoyo Tsubouchi) appeared a few years later. Later translations were crucial in the development of Shingeki, the new theatre that explored modern forms of realism within a Japanese context. Novels and short stories derived from Shakespearian materials were written throughout the century. But perhaps the most visible signs of Japanese Shakespeare have been the films of Akira Kurosawa: 'Castle of the Spider's Web' (from 'Macbeth', also known as 'Throne of Blood', 1957), 'The Bad Sleep Well' (from 'Hamlet', 1960), and 'Ran' ('Chaos', from 'King Lear', 1985); and the theatre productions of Yukio Ninagawa, especially his 'Macbeth' (1980), 'The Tempest' (1987), and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1994). Where Kurosawa rethought Shakespeare's narratives into Japanese history without using a line of Shakespeare's, Ninagawa used a range of Japanese theatrical styles and cultural concepts to contextualize the plays. 
However one looks at it, Shakespeare had become a global phenomenon. There were translations of his plays and poems into a vast array of languages, including Swedish (1813), Greek (1855), Hebrew (1874), Welsh (1874), Dutch (1880), Bulgarian (1881), Yiddish (1886), Arabic (1890s), Korean (1906), Scottish Gaelic (1911), Chinese (1922), and Maori (2000). Academics, teachers, and enthusiasts formed Shakespeare societies to rival the German one in, for example, the USA (1923, refounded 1973), Japan (1962), Korea (1963), France (1977), Australia and New Zealand (1990), the Low Countries (1993), and even Britain (2002). The International Shakespeare Association was created in 1974. A touring exhibition of materials from the Folger Shakespeare Library (1979-81) was justly called 'Shakespeare: the Globe and the World'. 
Shakespeare's global presence had been altered irrevocably by the development of film. Shakespeare's plays began to be recorded almost as soon as sound recordings began; performances were no longer to be contained within the theatre. Edwin Booth had been recorded in 1890 with a speech from 'Othello' and Ellen Terry, Henry Irving, and Beerbohm Tree were also caught on cylinder. 'Hamlet' was sold 'complete' on ten 78 r.p.m. discs with John Gielgud, 'Macbeth' in Orson Welles's Mercury Theatre production. But the technologies of the LP made full-length recordings more practicable. Great actors -- and many not-so-great -- could be heard in schools and at home, making the sound of Shakespeare spoken part of the educational and domestic experience of Shakespeare. He entered the home too as part of radio, especially from the BBC which started broadcasting Shakespeare in 1923 and for which Shakespeare has been the backbone of the radio drama repertory ever since. Hundreds of radio productions of the plays have been mounted, often with distinguished casts: Donald Wolfit, John Gielgud, Michael Redgrave, and Alec Guinness have all played Lear on radio. Radio has also generated vast numbers of critical, biographical, and theatrical features on Shakespeare, a significant part of the way that both Shakespeare's life and his work have been thought about. 
If Shakespeare on audio disc is necessarily invisible Shakespeare, the first films were necessarily silent Shakespeare. The earliest fragment to survive is the death of King John in Beerbohm Tree's production, filmed in 1899, though how much more was filmed is unclear. The film company, Biograph, was bidding for respectability, and Shakespeare was its route towards it. Sarah Bernhardt was filmed duelling as Hamlet in 1900 and there were further extracts from Georges Melies in 1907. In the following years there were hundreds of silent Shakespeares, most short, some an hour or more in length -- for example, a 1912 American 'Richard III' with Frederick Warde and the 1913 'Hamlet' with Sir Johnston Forbes-Robertson. 
If initially their style of film acting was overtly theatrical (and in Warde's case could be contrasted with readings and lectures by him 'live' in the gaps between reels at screenings), the film techniques were rapidly becoming sophisticated, encouraging a number of versions of Shakespeare's supernatural plays, 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' and 'The Tempest', which could make good use of trick effects. In 1916 Tree was lured to America to film 'Macbeth' but was mocked by the British press for succumbing to such commercialism. By the 1920s there were unquestionably major accomplishments in filmed Shakespeare, especially from Germany with Svend Gade's 1920 adaptation of 'Hamlet' (with Asta Nielsen as a female prince) and Buchowetski's 1922 'Othello' with Emil Jannings. There were also silent Shakespeare documentaries, fiction films with Shakespeare as a character, and Shakespeare parodies. Most strikingly, silent film was a genuinely international product (and it is significant how many of the films came from Italy and Germany and how few from England), for the intertitles could be easily remade into any language. 
There have been fewer Shakespeare sound films in the more than seventy years of the talkies than silent films in the previous thirty. Most of the silents are lost. Many of the sound films are widely available on video and DVD and have become a major element in teaching Shakespeare at school and university. In cinemas and homes, as well as schools, Shakespeare on film is by far the most common experience of Shakespeare in performance. Sound film has formed the modern popular images of performed Shakespeare, a sequence culminating in the success of Shakespeare himself on film in 'Shakespeare in Love' (1998), which won seven Oscars with its image of Shakespeare as young romantic genius in search of his muse, the inverse of the Droeshout engraving. 
Hollywood quickly recognized the possibilities of Shakespeare for talking pictures. 'The Taming of the Shrew' with Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks (1929) was at the bridge between silents and sound, but Warner Brothers' spectacular 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1935), based on Max Reinhardt's production and with a host of stars, great spectacle, much of Mendelssohn's music, and less than half of Shakespeare's words, showed what could be done. It was not, however, financially successful. 
Laurence Olivier, who had played Orlando in a Hollywood 'As You Like It' (1936), saw the possibilities for a heroic celebration of England in the middle of the Second World War in making 'Henry V' as a form of patriotic epic, starting from a nostalgic vision of the unblitzed London before a performance at the Globe. His broodingly Oedipal 'Hamlet' (1948) and comically villainous 'Richard III' (1955), another version of Shakespeare as guide to English history, defined English Shakespeare films as safe and traditional. The same was true of the rare American forays (for example, 'Julius Caesar' in 1953 and 1970), star-studded epics echoing Hollywood's Roman epics. 
Far more brilliantly, Orson Welles, with radical rethinking of the possibilities of cinema and meagre budgets, made incisive and complex versions of 'Macbeth' (1943), 'Othello' (1952), and the 'Henry IV' plays as 'Chimes at Midnight' (1966). If the 1960s were dominated by Franco Zeffirelli's popular and lush 'The Taming of the Shrew' (1966) and 'Romeo and Juliet' (1968), there were powerfully intelligent and superbly cinematic alternatives in Kurosawa's Japanese re-imaginings and Grigory Kozintsev's political readings of 'Hamlet' (1964) and 'King Lear' (1970), with great performances from Innokenti Smoktunovski as Hamlet and Yuri Yarvets as Lear and the benefits of Shostakovich's fine film-scores. 
While there were a number of films that did little more -- and often rather less -- than record successful stage productions, capturing a shadow of, for example, Olivier's performance as Othello (1965), a new era for popular and commercially successful Shakespeare films began with Kenneth Branagh's 'Henry V' (1989). Branagh followed it with 'Much Ado about Nothing' (1993) and a full-text, four-hour 'Hamlet' (1996). Baz Luhrmann's 'William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet' (1996) exploited the resources of film as never before, as well as using stars popular with teenage audiences, while Ian McKellen transformed his stage performance of Richard III into a narrative of an alternative twentieth-century history (directed by Richard Loncraine, 1996). 
Some of the most thoughtful and experimental work in filming Shakespeare has come from Britain, including Peter Brook's 'King Lear' (with Paul Scofield, 1971), Derek Jarman's 'The Tempest' (1979), Peter Greenaway's 'Prospero's Books' (1991, from 'The Tempest', with John Gielgud playing all the roles), and Christine Edzard's 'As You Like It' (1992). But Shakespeare has also been a major source for films that are offshoots, using a Shakespeare play as the underpinning for their own plots, for example 'Forbidden Planet' (1956, from 'The Tempest'), 'Men of Respect' (1990, from 'Macbeth'), and 'The Lion King' (1994, from 'Hamlet'). 
Throughout the twentieth century novelists and playwrights continued to work with and from Shakespeare to create their own dramas. The range has been immense and a very few examples in little more than a list must stand for all. 'The Tempest' stands behind John Fowles's 'The Magus' (1966) and Iris Murdoch's 'The Sea, the Sea' (1978) as well as Toni Morrison's 'Tar Baby' (1981) and Gloria Naylor's 'Mama Day' (1988). Jane Smiley re-imagined 'King Lear' in the American mid-west in 'A Thousand Acres' (1991), while Robert Nye gave an extradramatic life to 'Falstaff' (1976) and to 'Mrs Shakespeare' (1993). 'Hamlet' lies within Virginia Woolf's 'Between the Acts' (1941), John Updike's 'Gertrude and Claudius' (1999), and many murder mysteries, though the Shakespeare variety reached its apogee in James Thurber's 'The Macbeth murder mystery'. There have also been serious fictional biographies of Shakespeare, for example, Anthony Burgess's 'Nothing Like the Sun' (1964), and a superb comic one, Caryl Brahms's and S. J. Simon's 'No Bed for Bacon' (1941). 
On the stage Shakespeare has become a basis for musicals: for example, 'The Boys from Syracuse' (1938, from 'The Comedy of Errors', music by Richard Rodgers), 'Kiss Me Kate' (1948, from 'The Taming of the Shrew', music by Cole Porter), and 'West Side Story' (1957, from 'Romeo and Juliet', music by Leonard Bernstein). There have been sequels and prequels (for example, Howard Barker's 'Seven Lears', 1990, and Elaine Feinstein and the Women's Theatre Group's 'Lear's Daughters', 1991), plays developing minor characters (Tom Stoppard's 'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead', 1966) and rethinking the action (Edward Bond's 'Lear', 1971, Eugene Ionesco's 'Macbett', 1972, Charles Marowitz's collage versions collected as 'The Marowitz Shakespeare', 1978), plays providing cultural relocations (Welcome Msomi's 'uMabatha', 1972) and political reinterpretations (for example, Bertolt Brecht's 'Coriolanus', 1964, or his use of 'Richard III' in 'The Life of Galileo', 1943, and 'The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui', 1957). There have also been major successes in relocating plays to the opera house, especially Benjamin Britten's 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1960), Samuel Barber's 'Antony and Cleopatra' (1966), and Aribert Reimann's 'Lear' (1978), and one superb translation to ballet in the successive choreographic interpretations of Prokofiev's 'Romeo and Juliet' (1935) by Ashton, Cranko, MacMillan, and others. 
But as well as these adaptations for the stage, the plays themselves have a long and complex history of twentieth-century stage performance. Productions in continental Europe were often thoughtfully political and strikingly modernist in design, for example Leopold Jessner's 'Richard III' (1920) and 'Othello' (1921), both in Berlin, or the versions of 'Julius Caesar' by Leon Schiller (Warsaw, 1928) and Jiri Frejka (Prague, 1936). Such work was echoed by Orson Welles's stage work in America, with his 'voodoo' 'Macbeth' and his strongly anti-fascist 'Julius Caesar' in 1937. 
But little similar was seen in England, with the notable exception of Terence Gray's 'Richard III' (Cambridge, 1928) and Theodore Komisarjevsky's productions at Stratford (for example, 'King Lear', 1936). British experiment was more often more restrained: Barry Jackson startled London when his 1925 modern-dress 'Hamlet' had Hamlet in plus fours, but there was nothing radical about Jackson's reading of the play. Lilian Baylis's commitment to Shakespeare at the Old Vic Theatre led to all the plays in the first folio being produced there under Robert Atkins, ending in 1923 with 'Troilus and Cressida', a play whose stage history effectively began in the twentieth century. In the aftermath of his triumphant performances as Richard II (1929) and Hamlet (1930), John Gielgud turned to directing: his 'Romeo and Juliet' (1935) at the New Theatre, with Laurence Olivier exchanging Mercutio for Romeo during the run, was most remarkable for the sets by the three women designers known as Motley, whose abstracted forms allowed for fluid staging. Their designs transformed Shakespeare productions from Victorian ponderousness to a new light rapidity. 
In Stratford the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre reopened in 1932 after a fire in 1926. Its productions, often dull, occasionally brilliant, changed when Peter Brook arrived to direct 'Love's Labour's Lost' in 1946 and 'Titus Andronicus' in 1955, two previously unfashionable plays whose stageworthiness was newly proven. In 1960 Peter Hall created the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC), with a permanent ensemble company and year-round work in Stratford and London. Brook's Beckett-influenced 'King Lear' (1962), a production developed from an essay by the Polish Shakespeare critic Jan Kott, and Hall's 'The Wars of the Roses' (with John Barton, 1963-4) were early indications that the RSC could create powerful and innovative work to rival the best by European directors as well as their sustained advocacy of plays previously unfashionable, especially 'Troilus and Cressida' and 'Measure for Measure'. Buzz Goodbody's creation of The Other Place, a small studio-theatre in Stratford, defined radical new ways for the RSC to play Shakespeare in small spaces (for example, her 'Hamlet' in 1975 and Trevor Nunn's 'Macbeth' in 1976). 
In North America the post-war period was most marked by the rapid growth of theatres hosting Shakespeare festivals, like Tyrone Guthrie's at Stratford, Ontario, from 1953 or Joseph Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival in Central Park from 1954 or at Ashland, Oregon. By the end of the century there were seventy Shakespeare festivals across the continent. In western Europe directors, many heavily influenced by Brechtian principles, searched the plays for political meanings, most excitingly in the work of Roger Planchon in France and Giorgio Strehler in Italy (especially 'The Tempest' in 1978). In the Soviet bloc after 1968 officially acceptable productions had to compete with productions that used Shakespeare to encode criticism of the state, for example Yuri Lyubimov's 'Hamlet' (Moscow, 1971). 
In the last quarter of the century English Shakespeare production outside the still-flourishing RSC (under Peter Hall, Trevor Nunn, Terry Hands, Adrian Noble, and Michael Boyd) and the fine work at the Royal National Theatre varied from the excellent traditional work at the Regent's Park Open Air Theatre in London to the popular and political productions of Michael Bogdanov's and Michael Pennington's English Shakespeare Company ('The Wars of the Roses', 1987-8) to the defiant northern voices of Barrie Rutter's Northern Broadsides (from 1992). In London a long campaign to build an authentic reconstruction of the Globe, an often uneasy collaboration between Sam Wanamaker's single-minded drive, architects, and scholars, resulted finally in Shakespeare's Globe opening in 1997 and playing thereafter to large and appreciative audiences. If the economics of theatre made Shakespeare's large casts problematic, there were innovative solutions in every corner of the country. 
For the first time a significant number of women directed Shakespeare, including Ariane Mnouchkine in France, Karin Beier in Germany, and Deborah Warner and Jude Kelly in England. Productions experimented with cross-cultural influences, especially after the success in the West of Ninagawa's work. Productions could be played with cross-gendered casting, with multilingual casts, with barely a shred of Shakespeare's text, or without a line being cut. Productions could last one hour or six, with casts of fifty or two, with massive sets or none, in daylight or with complex lighting, in theatres large and small or in the street. In Britain, in particular, Shakespeare is also the staple of amateur production with many thousands of performances every year by schoolchildren of all ages, by university societies, and by local groups brand new and long-established. Shakespeare seems still to be everywhere where theatre is being made: in China in 1986 a Shakespeare festival gathered twenty-eight Chinese productions; in the 1990s there were over forty productions of 'Hamlet' in Korea. Always provoking theatre workers and stretching them to their limits, Shakespeare is unquestionably still the major driving force in world theatre. 
In many of the world's educational systems Shakespeare remains at the core of literary study, compulsory in the English national curriculum at secondary school and all but compulsory in many other countries. At universities his plays are central to the study of literature and drama and, though political battles in the United States to revise the canon of literary study led to Shakespeare no longer being compulsory at many universities, more students than ever take Shakespeare courses there. The editing of Shakespeare has responded to these different needs with innovative editions for schools (for example, Rex Gibson's 'Cambridge School Shakespeare', from 1991), major student editions of the complete works (for example, edited by Peter Alexander, 1951; the 'Riverside Shakespeare', 1974, 2nd edn 1997; and the 'Norton Shakespeare', 1997), and repeated revisions of established series or forms of presentation (for example, the 'New Cambridge', 'Oxford', and 'Arden third' series). 
Shakespeare editing has been transformed by new principles of textual bibliography but also by the availability of computers, on-line databases and web-delivered editions. New theories about the early texts, especially that they represent for some plays (for example, 'King Lear') successive stages of Shakespeare's own revision of the plays, have led to the appearance of multiple-text editions, in the wake of the inclusion of both quarto- and folio-derived texts of 'Lear' in the 'Oxford Shakespeare', edited by Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor (1986). Successive movements in scholarship have produced dramatic changes in the understanding of Shakespeare's sources, the printing of the folio, Shakespeare's processes of composition, and the cultural, political, and theatrical contexts within which he wrote. 
The development of major resources for scholars has included the Folger Shakespeare Library, opened in 1932 with the collection of Henry Clay Folger and amounting to the world's largest collection of Shakespeare materials, with seventy-nine copies of the first folio; the Shakespeare Centre Library in Stratford upon Avon, which includes the RSC's archives; and the Shakespeare Institute of the University of Birmingham, founded by Allardyce Nicoll in 1951. Shakespeare conferences proliferate, but the annual conference of the Shakespeare Association of America, the biennial International Shakespeare Conference in Stratford upon Avon, and the quinquennial World Shakespeare Congress each gather many hundreds of scholars from all over the world. There are numerous Shakespeare journals, including 'Shakespeare Survey' (started by Nicoll in 1948), 'Shakespeare Newsletter' (from 1951), two called 'Shakespeare Studies' (in Japan from 1961 and the USA since 1965), and, from 1950, the Folger-based 'Shakespeare Quarterly', whose annual listing of publications in its 'World Shakespeare Bibliography' (now available online) testifies to the colossal output of the academic Shakespeare industry. 
There are times when the multiple modes of Shakespeare criticism can seem bewildering -- with, in the last quarter of the twentieth century, such dominant strands as new historicism, cultural materialism, feminist studies, and gender criticism, queer theory, and cultural studies. Psychoanalytical approaches seem to have little connection with stage- and film-oriented ones. The study of the material culture of early modern England seems to be radically distinct as a mode of academic investigation from the history of Shakespeare translation. The exploration of Renaissance reading habits can seem to sit uncomfortably beside studies in Shakespeare pedagogy. 
Not the least important part of this activity has been biographical study. There have been so many biographies of Shakespeare that Samuel Schoenbaum wrote a large as well as entertaining study of the history of Shakespeare biography, 'Shakespeare's Lives' (1970). Among the most important biographies of recent years have been Schoenbaum's 'William Shakespeare: a Documentary Life' (1975), Park Honan's 'Shakespeare: a Life' (1998), Katherine Duncan-Jones's 'Ungentle Shakespeare' (2001) and James Shapiro's '1599: a Year in the Life of William Shakespeare' (2005) -- each contributing significantly to our understanding of the facts and the interpretation of the hypotheses concerning Shakespeare's life. 
But the plurality of Shakespeare studies is united by the extraordinary range of meanings provoked by Shakespeare. As much concerned with the history of Shakespeare's afterlife as with close analysis of particular texts, as interested in Shakespeare in twenty-first-century Brazil as in sixteenth-century London, as excited by Shakespeare in nineteenth-century Hebrew as in early modern English, Shakespeare studies engage with every aspect of the culture that produced Shakespeare and the cultures his work has produced. 
For if Shakespeare has often seemed to some to be the prerogative of English high culture, then throughout the world Shakespeare, his image, and his works have been appropriated for every kind of popular cultural usage, signs both of his cultural authority and of the cultural contestation his works provoke. 
In Britain politicians of the left and right rely on Shakespeare as a national and quasi-religious authority for their political creeds. The Labour leader Neil Kinnock, the heir to nineteenth-century political oratory with its predilection for quoting Shakespeare, required his speech-writers to know the 'Bible' and Shakespeare, the twin bedrocks of working-class culture. At the opposite end of the political spectrum, right-wing Conservative politicians like Michael Portillo returned with mechanical frequency to Ulysses's speech on degree in 'Troilus and Cressida' as 'proof' that Shakespeare supported the hierarchies and institutions tories were committed to maintain. 
Shakespeare's plays are quoted in every kind of popular film and television programme. Episodes in many situation comedies show how contested the place of Shakespeare is in American or British society as children wrestle with Shakespeare homework, parents quote Shakespeare defiantly, or the school Shakespeare production looms. The last of the original 'Star Trek' films, 'Star Trek VI' (1991), quotes Shakespeare in its subtitle, 'The Undiscovered Country', and jokes about Shakespeare sounding better in the original Klingon, a language invented for the television series whose devotees have indeed 'translated' 'Hamlet' into Klingon (2000). There are pornographic films with fragments of Shakespearian plots (both heterosexual and homosexual) and strip clubs that have tried to avoid censorship by having the strippers speak Shakespeare's lines. 
In the camp horror film 'Theatre of Blood' (1973), a disgruntled Shakespearian actor, played by Vincent Price, murders theatre critics in appropriately Shakespearian ways. The science-fiction film 'Forbidden Planet' (1956) spawned a musical stage adaptation, 'Return to the Forbidden Planet' (1989), which used classic rock songs and Shakespearian puns ('Beware the Ids that march'). Versions of twelve plays, made as animated 30-minute episodes by S4C, a Welsh television company, in collaboration with Russian animators, were screened in 1992, the texts adapted by Leon Garfield, author of short narrative versions for children, successors to Lambs' 'Tales'. 
There are strip cartoons which use the entire Shakespeare text in speech bubbles as well as one which shows Shakespeare being given his plots by supernatural beings. A British heavyweight boxer, Frank Bruno, appeared on television in drag in a comedy sketch in which he played Juliet in the balcony scene. Shakespeare's lines appear in rock songs and rap, while a serious popular singer Elvis Costello collaborated with the classical Brodsky Quartet on 'The Juliet Letters' (1996), whose lyrics are imaginary letters to Shakespeare's heroine. When listeners to BBC Radio 4's 'Today' programme voted Shakespeare the 'Man of the millennium' in 1999, there was hardly any surprise at the choice. Castaways on 'Desert Island Discs' on BBC, the world's longest-running radio programme, are always allowed a copy of Shakespeare as well as the 'Bible' for their island. 
Shakespeare and his characters have been extensively used for advertising. There are cigars named Hamlet, Romeo y Julieta, Falstaff, and Antonio y Cleopatra. His own image and his characters have been used to sell, for example, Ford cars, Shell petrol, Schweppes soft drinks, and Maxwell House coffee and, since 1986, Coca-Cola, Shreddies breakfast cereal, Typhoo tea, and Carling Black Label lager. 
Shakespeare has appeared on English banknotes, as a hologram on British cheque-guarantee cards, and on playing cards. His characters have made up chess sets and cigarette cards. There are statues, streets, squares, piazzas, and avenues named after Shakespeare and after his most famous characters in many cities of the world. There are Shakespeare pubs in many British airports and an American company, Celebriducks, sells plastic Shakespeare ducks for the bath. Souvenirs from Stratford have been available since the eighteenth century and ceramic images of Shakespeare as figurines, on plates, toby jugs, and on the tops of walking-sticks proliferated in the nineteenth. 
More seriously, the Shakespeare tourist industry is a vital component of the economic stability of the West Midlands region in England and theatre companies like the Royal Shakespeare Company and Shakespeare's Globe are major employers. There are no figures available for the value of the global Shakespeare economy, but it must run to many billions of pounds per annum. Quite what this extraordinary plethora of Shakespeare material means lies outside the scope of this account. Its mere existence testifies eloquently to the overwhelming presence of Shakespeare, both the man and his works, throughout almost every aspect of the world's culture, in almost every language, in ways often so familiar as hardly to be noticed. His biography, the history of his life and his cultural afterlives, is not only national but triumphantly international. 


@@@@@


doc= 25201


Shalders, George (c.1825-1873), watercolour painter, was born in Portsmouth and began to exhibit in London at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street in 1848. He showed fifteen paintings at the Royal Academy, the last in 1864. In 1863 he became an associate of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, and a member in 1864, and subsequently he exhibited only there. He painted landscapes, usually views in Hampshire, Surrey, Yorkshire, Wales, and Ireland, often containing cattle or sheep. Reviewing the 1865 exhibition at the New Watercolour Society, in which his 'Fresh Pasture' was exhibited, the critic writing for the 'Art Journal' commented that 'Sheep are folded and driven to field by Mr Shalders with a truth and beauty which finds no rivals' ('Art Journal', 27, 1 June 1865, 176). His 'Cows in a Landscape' is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Shalders died a widower on 27 January 1873 at his home, 10 Berkeley Gardens, Campden Hill, London, leaving three young daughters. His early death was said to have been caused by overwork, following the death of his wife two years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 25202


Shank, John (d. 1636), actor, is of unknown origins. Fortunately his personal and professional life are better documented, thanks largely to testimony he gave to the lord chamberlain in 1635 and to the will he signed on 31 December in the same year. He had a long career as a professional actor, in 1635 describing himself as 'an old man in this quality' ('Dramatic records', 367). His will records him as 'one of his Maiesties servants the players and Citizen and Weauer of london' (Honigmann and Brock, 186). He almost certainly lived in London all his life. Shank married Winifred Porter on 12 February 1610 in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West. They seem to have spent their married life in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, where they may have run a boarding house. Of their several children only Elizabeth ('bap'. 1612), John (possibly baptized on 16 March 1616), and James ('bap'. 1619) seem to have survived into adult life. Elizabeth married someone called Bowen and had a daughter, another Winifred. John Shank's elder son was, possibly, a player at the Red Bull and the Fortune, a circumstance that has led to a certain amount of confusion between him and his father, although the younger man survived him by twenty years or so. 
The older Shank began his acting career with Pembroke's Men some time after 1592. Later he joined the Queen Elizabeth's Men. By 1610 he was a member of the company whose patron was Prince Henry. He is named as a groom of Prince Henry's chamber on a livery list of 8 November 1612 and his name appears on a patent of 11 January 1613. This was issued when the company came under the patronage of the elector palatine or Palsgrave, a move necessitated by the death of Prince Henry in November 1612. Perhaps Shank supplied the company with the wherewithal for costumes, since on 24 December 1614 a John Shank of St Giles was involved with receiving goods stolen from a linen draper. By the end of 1618 he had left Palatine's Men and had joined the company with which he was to be associated for the rest of his life, the King's Men. Between March 1619 and May 1629 his name appears on six of their patents and livery lists. In 1624, when the King's Men got into trouble for playing 'The Spanish Viceroy' without permission, he was a signatory on their letter of apology to Sir Henry Herbert, the master of the revels. He appeared in several plays known to have been in the repertoire of the King's Men. He is included on the list of principal actors in the great 1623 folio of Shakespeare's plays. No specific Shakespearian roles have been assigned to him. He seems to have specialized in comic roles and he was probably extremely thin. In Philip Massinger's 'The Picture' (licensed on 8 June 1629), for example, he played the clown Hilario, one of a number of parts that may have capitalized on his physical characteristics. He appeared as Hodge A Countrey Fellowe in John Clavell's 'The Soddered Citizen' ('c'.1630), a play in which one of his apprentices also took part. In or about 1632 the King's Men revived 'The Wild Goose Chase', in which he was cast as an impudent but unnamed servant. Diagoras in 'The Maid's Tragedy' (revived 'c'.1630) is another servant role he may have played. There are several early allusions to Shank which associate him with other comic performers, pointing out how he used to sing his own rhymes, and commenting on his dancing. He also wrote and performed jigs. His own entertainment, 'Shank's Ordinarie', no longer extant, was licensed for the King's Men on 16 March 1624. 
As well as acting, writing, and providing costumes Shank performed other services for the King's Men. He was on occasions their financial agent and he also 'supplyed the company... with boyes' ('Dramatic records', 369). These included Thomas Pollard, John Thompson, John Honeyman, Thomas Holcome, and Nicholas Burt. Some were his apprentices; it was customary for senior members of the company to teach the boy players their art. He may also have run some kind of training and/or boarding establishment for boys. 
Shank invested in the King's Men, holding shares that had originally belonged to John Heminges. On his death in 1630 the heir, Heminges's son William sold them to Shank. It was these shares and those of the surviving members of the Burbage family that were the subject of the dispute recorded in the 'Sharers' Papers' of 1635. Robert Benfield, Eyllaerdt Swanston, and Thomas Pollard, fellow King's Men, petitioned the lord chamberlain to allow them to purchase shares in the Blackfriars and the Globe theatres. Richard Burbage's widow, Winifred, by then remarried, and her brother-in-law Cuthbert objected, as did John Shank. An order was made to allow the petitioners to buy some of Shank's shares, but no agreement was reached about the price. So on 1 August 1635 the case was passed to Sir Henry Herbert for arbitration. The matter had still not been finally resolved by Shank's death in January 1636. He was buried at St Giles Cripplegate on the 27th of that month. Winifred Shank remarried some time before 26 August 1639, when she was a legatee in the will of Richard Benfield, a kinsman of the King's player. 


@@@@@


doc= 25203


Shardlow, Sir John (d. 1344), justice, was probably born at Thompson, Norfolk, though the name of the family may have been derived from the village of Shardlow in Derbyshire. He became a serjeant-at-law in 1318, and in August 1319 received the first of more than 130 commissions of oyer and terminer recorded to him in the chancery rolls. During the London eyre of 1321 he acted as pleader in twenty-nine cases, and received a fee of 40's'. for his services on behalf of the city of London after the conclusion of the eyre. In July 1326 he is mentioned as chief justice of the common bench in Ireland but seems never to have taken up his duties there. During Michaelmas term 1329 he acted temporarily as justice of the king's bench; a permanent appointment to the common pleas followed in January 1332. In this year he also became a knight of the Bath. Shardlow appears in year-book reports from Michaelmas 1320 onwards, though his contributions cannot always be clearly identified, because the abbreviated form of his surname may sometimes refer to his colleagues William Shareshull (died 1370) or Robert Scarborough. Apart from his work in the common pleas he also frequently acted as justice of assize on the eastern circuit and as justice of gaol delivery, as well as on special commissions; in October 1337 for instance he was appointed to deal with deserters from the royal army in the north of England. 
After Edward III's unexpected return to London on 30 November 1340 Shardlow's career seemed to have come to an end when, despite a commission to act as justice of oyer and terminer addressed to him on 8 January 1341, he was among those royal officials who by 13 January had been arrested and subjected to the scrutiny of a judicial commission. In the following month he was among the thirteen justices against whom accusations and complaints were invited. His disgrace lasted for more than a year until on 16 May 1342 he was again appointed justice of the common pleas. In the second phase of his career he received several commissions to investigate smuggling, the import of counterfeit money, and other economic offences. This was part of a concerted campaign in several counties; Shardlow concentrated mainly on East Anglia. Summoned to parliament in July 1332 he also heard petitions from Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Gascony, and other areas during the Easter parliament of 1343. 
The income from Shardlow's legal practice enabled him to lend substantial sums of money ($20, $40) to neighbouring landholders in 1324/5, and after 1332 he purchased several estates in Cambridgeshire and Suffolk. At the time of his death, on 5 March 1344, he held parts of the two manors of Fulbourn (near Cambridge) and Leverington (near Wisbech), three shops in Wisbech, and lands and rents to the value of $1 6's'. 8died in six places in Suffolk, as well as estates in Norfolk. In 1349 his sons John and Thomas founded a chantry for him and his wife, Agnes, in the church of Thompson, Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 25204


Shareshull, Sir William (1289/90-1370), justice, was born in Staffordshire, at Shareshull or possibly Walsall, into a family which may have ranked among the lesser gentry; perhaps he was a younger son of Adam Shareshull and Katherine. His highly successful career brought him estates in Oxfordshire (especially Barton Odonis), Staffordshire, Worcestershire, and Shropshire. He married twice, soon after 1316 and again in the summer of 1357, each time to a woman named Dionisia. His first marriage probably linked him to the Purcells, a family of slightly higher status than his own. His second marriage, to the daughter and heir of William Bottiler, greatly extended his landholding. His only son, William, predeceased him. His three daughters, Katherine, Elizabeth, and Agnes, made what were considered good marriages, reflecting their father's social rise; Agnes, for example, married Sir Richard Abberbury (c.1330-1399) ['see under 'Abberbury family]. 
Shareshull first appears in the legal records, which document so much of his life, in the 1310s, both as a litigant and a juror in his home county. His first appearance in the common pleas came in 1316; he first acted as an attorney, for the man who probably was (or would soon become) his father-in-law, in 1319. Having served a period as an apprentice-at-law, his career reached a new stage by 1324 when he was promoted to serjeant-at-law. Appointments to a variety of judicial commissions began in the same year and continued for four decades; moreover, from this time the yearbooks begin to mention him frequently as a pleader. His first assize commission came in March 1329. The regard of men important in the king's government, and in the law courts, no doubt lay behind Shareshull's appointment as king's serjeant at the end of 1330. In Easter term 1333 he became a justice of the common bench, receiving the status of knight-banneret with his appointment. For two terms in 1334 he moved to the king's bench, replacing Geoffrey Scrope, but then returned to his former post until Edward III removed him (along with other officials) in the crisis of 1340-41. 
Shareshull was temporarily disgraced and confined in Caerphilly Castle, but was never formally charged and was soon back in favour and at work as a justice; he returned to the common bench in 1342 and was again a frequent holder of judicial commissions. On 3 July 1344 he became chief baron of the exchequer, leaving this post in Hilary term 1346 to become second justice of the common bench. From Easter 1350 to Easter 1361 he sat as chief justice of the king's bench. His biographer, Bertha Putnam, argued that he was highly influential in the legislation regulating labour after the plague of 1348-9, and in the statutory definition of treason, that he was a determined upholder of law and order, and a tireless collector of sizeable amounts of revenue through judicial fines. 
For thirty years Shareshull served Edward, the Black Prince, as well as his father; he came to be retained as a 'bachelor' of the prince, conducted judicial inquests in his lands, and sat frequently on his council. He was likewise considered a close adviser in matters of law by such lords as the abbots of Glastonbury and Ramsey. Such service must have been well rewarded despite the oath, required by the ordinance of 1346, that justices give no counsel to litigants in matters concerning the king and take no fees, robes, or gifts. 
Shareshull was not universally popular; in the Middle English poem 'Wynnere and Wastoure', for example, he is denounced by name. Moreover, he personally encountered the violence that troubled his era. He was attacked and abducted in June 1329, possibly as an attempt to keep him out of court; two prominent knights attacked his household in York in 1333; armed force was threatened against his sessions in Wiltshire in 1336, and may have hastened his departure into a neighbouring county; two of his houses were attacked in 1337, and other break-ins came in 1355 and 1358; his judicial sessions at Tredington were broken up by force in 1347; a clerk and others, probably labourers, were brought to court in 1358, charged with having announced that they would gladly strike Shareshull, given the chance. The most interesting incident occurred in 1344 at Ipswich, following oyer and terminer sessions that had yielded particularly heavy fines. A man who had 'busied himself about the king's business there before William de Shareshull and his fellows' had been killed, and as soon as the justices left, the townspeople, rich and poor, feasted the killers with delicacies and honoured them with gifts, 'as if God had come down from Heaven'. Then from the very steps of the hall of pleas they 'caused proclamation to be made that William of Shareshull was to appear before them under penalty of a hundred pounds... in mockery of the king's justices and ministers in his service' (Sayles, 6.37). Ipswich soon had its liberties taken into the king's hands. 
Shareshull's religion may have been of a conventional sort. If he sounded a secular note in his judicial opinions, he could speak in tones of standard piety in a letter to his friend Walter Monington, abbot of Glastonbury. His bequests were likewise typical of his age and status. His piety was certainly not lacking in that degree of independence so often seen among the privileged ranks of the laity. In the dispute between Thomas Lisle, bishop of Ely (died 1361), and Blanche, Lady Wake, who was the king's cousin, Shareshull and other royal justices and officials were cited in 1357 to appear in the papal court at Avignon; they disregarded this citation and fell under papal excommunication. The excommunication was lifted some time later, but Shareshull had earned the king's gratitude for his stand. His vigour lasted nearly to the end of his life. Even after his retirement from the king's bench, Shareshull continued to serve on a variety of judicial commissions. Early in 1369, however, he entered the Franciscan convent in Oxford as a novice and died, and was buried there early in the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 25205


Sharington, Sir William (c.1495-1553), administrator and embezzler, was the first son of Thomas Sharington (died 1527?) of Norfolk and his wife, Katherine, daughter and heir of William Pyrton of Little Bentley, Essex. Despite the obscurity of his early years, it seems clear that two men were instrumental in his rise to importance: Sir Francis Bryan, diplomat and soldier, of whose affinity he was by 1538; and (also in Bryan's service) Sir Thomas Seymour, the younger brother of Protector Somerset. To the former Sharington was related by marriage by virtue of his taking as his first wife Ursula, the illegitimate daughter of John Bourchier, second Lord Berners, who was Bryan's brother-in-law; to the latter he became 'my friend' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/1, no. 43). By 1539 Sharington was page of the king's robes and in 1540 was appointed groom. In the following year he became page of the privy chamber and then, in 1542, when he also became joint steward and constable of Castle Rising, Norfolk, groom. As such, he had close personal access to Henry VIII and was ideally placed to gain further preferment. In 1546 he was made under-treasurer, or head, of the newly established mint in Bristol; in 1547 he was appointed to commissions to investigate the mints and the admiralty; and in the following year he became a chantry commissioner for Gloucester, Gloucestershire, and Bristol. The king is said to have trusted him, and so too must Queen Katherine Parr, who had welcomed him into her household by 1544. Sadly, as the investigations into the treasonous activities of Thomas Seymour subsequently revealed, this trust was entirely misplaced. 
According to the act of attainder of 1549 by which Sir William Sharington (he had been knighted at the coronation of Edward VI in 1547) was condemned, he had been guilty of four offences: coining $2000 in testoons, or shilling pieces, without warrant; coining a further $10,000 in testoons, also without warrant; gaining over $4000 profit by making his coins too light; and covering his tracks by compiling false records and burning the originals. Each was a serious charge but what gave them especial significance was that in rushing to Seymour, obviously with the intention of obtaining his protective support should his misdeeds be discovered, Sharington had succumbed to Seymour's plots. On being asked whether he could make $10,000, sufficient to keep 10,000 men in the field for a month, Sharington had agreed that he could, provided bullion were available, and, moreover, he had said that so long as there was a mint in Bristol, Seymour 'should lack no money' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/6, no. 13). What had started out as simple fraud -- the result, according to his own confession, of his fear that his minting activities would leave him significantly out of pocket, but possibly also of his overspending on building activities at his principal seat of Lacock Abbey, Wiltshire, which he had purchased in 1540 for $783 -- had ended in disaster. Lacock and other properties, mostly in Wiltshire, which he had purchased for $3800 were confiscated, as were 1937 ounces of plate and other goods including $1000 in ingots and old gold, and gold and silver which it was estimated would have made up to $14,000 in coin. However, having interceded for help with the earls of Shrewsbury and Southampton and with Somerset directly for mercy, his life was spared; the simple reason being that once Seymour had been executed Sir William was no political threat at all. On 5 November 1549 he was pardoned and subsequently restored to his estates on payment of $12,867. In a sermon by Hugh Latimer preached before Edward VI in Lent 1549 -- a sermon in which Seymour was castigated and through which it was said Latimer earned the 'great hatred of many' (BL, Add. MS 48023, fol. 351) -- Sharington was depicted as 'an honest gentleman, and one that God loveth... a chosen man of God, and one of his elected' (Latimer, 227). 
Restored to lands and favour, Sharington was appointed in April 1550 with Sir Maurice Dennis, treasurer of Calais, to take receipt in France of 200,000 crowns, the first payment for the sale of Boulogne back to the French. He continued on the commission of the peace for Wiltshire, to which he had been appointed in 1547; in 1553 he became one of the commissioners in Wiltshire for the confiscation of church goods; and, on the ennoblement of Sir William Herbert in October 1551, he was returned at a by-election as an MP for Wiltshire, a position to which he had been elected in 1547 but from which he had been ejected upon his disgrace in 1549. Earlier on he had served as MP for Heytesbury (1545) and Bramber (1547). His appointment as sheriff of Wiltshire in 1552 effectively stymied his possible candidature for the parliament of 1553. 
Over and above the rents that came from his lands and his salary of $133 6's'. 8died at the mint, Sharington enjoyed an income from moneylending, which he appears to have practised on some scale, dealing with, among others, Sir William Herbert, Sir Miles Partridge, and Protector Somerset. Then there were his trading activities. In 1542, on Henry VIII's recommendation, he was made an honorary freeman of London and it was from there through his factor that he traded with Antwerp, importing in 1549, for example, 'Tapistry, Tiks and Lynnen Clothe for my Lorde Admirall [Thomas Seymour] hymself, and sum other of his Frends' (Haynes, 64), worth over $2000. He also traded extensively in lead and English wool, owned ships, and ventured capital with Bristol merchants, on one occasion 'Southward', on another to 'Thisles of Portingale for Frute' (ibid., 65). 
A man of culture, as evidenced by the Renaissance-style features of his building works at Lacock, Sharington survives through a drawing of him by Holbein, now at Windsor Castle. He married as his second wife Eleanor, daughter of William Walsingham, and in 1542, as his third wife, Grace, 'nee' Farrington, widow of Robert Paget, alderman of London, but left no children, and when he died, before 22 November 1553, he was succeeded by his brother Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 25206


Sharp, Abraham (bap. 1653, d. 1742), mathematician and scientific instrument maker, was born at Horton Hall, Little Horton, near Bradford, and baptized at Bradford, Yorkshire, on 1 June 1653, the ninth child and sixth son of John Sharp of Little Horton, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Robert Clarkson of Bradford. His nineteenth-century biographer, William Cudworth, believed that he was born in 1653 and that the monumental inscription stating that he died in his ninety-first year is incorrect; evidence to support this appears in a letter of November 1715, where Sharp says he is 'now in my grand Clymacterick', or sixty-third year (Royal Greenwich Observatory Archives, CUL, RGO 1/34, fol. 125'r'). 
John Sharp prospered as a farmer, clothier, and merchant; during the civil war period he took the side of parliament and served as financial secretary to General Sir Thomas Fairfax; he later became a collector of Commonwealth taxes. He gave his sons a good education, sending two to university and placing the rest in respectable trades. Abraham went on from a village school to Bradford grammar school and in May 1669 was apprenticed to a York mercer. He probably learned some mathematics as a schoolboy, and as an apprentice must have studied its practical applications. Some accounts assert that he left his master prematurely and moved to Liverpool, where he taught writing and commercial arithmetic; this is not implausible, as a legacy of $160 on his father's death in 1672 may have prompted or assisted the move. 
Nothing more is known of Sharp's activities until the spring of 1684, when he was in London, using the Hen and Chickens in the Strand as a correspondence address, and began to assist the astronomer royal, John Flamsteed, at the Royal Observatory at Greenwich. He was employed there for some months during 1684-5 and from August 1688 to the autumn of 1690. In the intervening period he lived in London but remained in close touch with Flamsteed. During his second stay at the observatory he helped complete the great mural arc, 6 feet 9 inches in radius, which was to serve as Flamsteed's principal instrument for three decades and set a new standard for the observatories of Europe. In this connection Flamsteed described Sharp as: 'the fittest for my purpose, that could be[,] a curious Mechanick and An excellent Geometrician, who screwd the limbe, wrought the Index and after I had fixed the point for the beginning of the divisions inscribed them and engraved the Numbers both for the diagonalls and revolves so curiously that I thinke I may say... tis the neatest limbe that ever was made of the same bignesse. ('Correspondence of John Flamsteed', 2.449)' In carrying on the everyday business of astronomy, however, Sharp sometimes seemed 'as uselesse to me as any that can but write well could be, or rather lesse' (ibid., 2.451), so his departure was not much regretted. 
On leaving the Greenwich observatory in November 1690, Sharp lodged with William Court at the Mariner and Anchor on Little Tower Hill, where mathematical books and instruments were sold; he possibly succeeded his acquaintance Marmaduke Hodgeson as Court's resident teacher of mathematics. Soon afterwards he was offered a clerkship in the king's shipyard at Portsmouth and overcame a reluctance to accept it: one of his notebooks reveals that he moved to Portsmouth in February 1691 and had some connection with the dockyard, though his presence seems to have left no trace in its official records. He also received occasional sums for teaching and a salary of $10 a year from a Mr Graham, perhaps as an instrument maker. The interlude was a brief one: on the death of his eldest brother in 1693, his widowed sister-in-law asked him to return to Little Horton. He did so early in 1694 and lived there for the rest of his life. His principal importance in the locality was as a promoter and generous patron of the first Presbyterian chapel in Bradford. 
Horton Hall was demolished in the 1960s, but is known to have been a stone-built house in a style characteristic of the area; Sharp is believed to have adapted its central tower to create an observing platform. His continuing interest in mathematics, astronomy, and instrument making is reflected in surviving notebooks and in correspondence with local and London friends. He sold an odometer to his distant relative John Sharp, archbishop of York, and corresponded occasionally with the antiquary Ralph Thoresby, who lists 'a declining Dial for the Library Window, by the celebrated Mr. Abr. Sharp' among his collection of 'Rarities' (Thoresby, 475). Sharp was also in touch with the elder and younger Euclid Speidell, Joseph Raphson, Henry Sherwin, Edmond Halley, the optical instrument maker John Yarwell, and the publisher Richard Mount; their letters reflect Sharp's endeavours to obtain books and instruments and to secure publication of mathematical works. His 'Geometry Improv'd', containing elaborate tables and a treatise on polyhedra, appeared in 1717; Sherwin's 'Mathematical Tables' (1710 and many later editions) also included a substantial contribution from: 'the ingenious and unwearied Mr. Abr. Sharp, with his Table of Logarithms to above fifty Figures... the Construction of the Sines, Tangents and Secants; with the whole Process of the Quadrature of the Circle to 72 Figures: Which Quadrature was invented... by Mr. Halley. (Sherwin, preface)' Sharp claimed that his earlier paper on this last subject, fruitlessly submitted to the Royal Society, had predated and informed Halley's work. 
From February 1702 until his death at the end of 1719, Flamsteed was Sharp's principal correspondent. Virtually all the letters they exchanged survive, and many of them reveal details of Sharp's activities. By 1702 he had 'made a small Instrument to which I have adapted a Six ft Telescope in the nature of sights; hereby both the altitude and azimuth may be had at the same instant' ('Correspondence of John Flamsteed', 2.908), had improved his lathe by devising 'Engines, one for Rose and Crown work, the other for Ovall and Rose work, and likewise... an Engine for cutting Wheels' (ibid., 2.909), and had 'made a large brasse Sphaere or Armilla of a peculiar contrivance, which with much ease... represents any sphaericall Triangle that can be proposed' (ibid., 2.932). This last may be the instrument depicted on his tombstone and in a portrait engraving by George Vertue (1744). 
Sharp went on to assist his former employer in a variety of ways: he made him a micrometer (1704); calculated places of the moon and planets and extensive subsidiary tables for the planned 'Historia coelestis'; produced tables of the predicted eclipses of Jupiter's satellites annually from 1707 to 1719 (for 1708 to 1720); attempted to observe some of these and other eclipses, rarely with success; and systematically collected barometric observations. After Flamsteed's death he corresponded with the Greenwich assistant Joseph Crosthwait and helped prepare the revised 'Historia coelestis Britannica' (1725) for publication; in particular he produced an updated version of Halley's catalogue of the southern stars. He also worked on star charts for the 'Atlas coelestis' (1729). 
Sharp died at Horton Hall on 18 July 1742, and was buried on 21 July in St Peter's, Bradford (now Bradford Cathedral), where a monument was later erected. His instruments and tools were dispersed; those few that survive are at Bolling Hall Museum, Bradford, the National Maritime Museum, and the Science Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 25207


Sharp, Sir Cuthbert (1781-1849), historian, was born at Hartlepool, co. Durham, the son of Cuthbert Sharp, a shipowner, and his wife, Susannah (died 1794), the daughter of Hercules Crosby of Stockton. His mother was the sister of Brass Crosby, the controversial lord mayor of London and an important figure in political history, especially in connection with the publication of parliamentary debates. Sharp was educated at Greenwich in the school of the eminent Greek scholar Dr Charles Burney. When he was about eighteen he took a commission in the Essex fencibles, a cavalry force introduced by the government for the defence of the kingdom. He saw action in Ireland and, having studied briefly at Edinburgh University, became one of the first Britons to visit Paris after the peace of Amiens of 1801. When the treaty broke down he was taken as a prisoner of war but used influence to stay on parole in the French capital. While there he made himself an expert in the language and customs of France. After being a prisoner 'for some years' (Brockie, 143) he returned to England via the Netherlands. In 1811 he eloped with Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Croudace of Bishopwearmouth, Sunderland. Two marriage ceremonies were performed, the first at Coldstream on 15 October and the second at the English church, Edinburgh, on 22 October. There appears to have been one child from the marriage -- a daughter, Louise Laura. 
Sources agree that the main focus of Sharp's life thereafter became literary, and three publications, in particular, are worthy of reference. His 'Bishoprick Garland' (1834), a mixture of scraps of north-eastern songs and traditional nursery rhymes, was reprinted at the end of the twentieth century and used by researchers into cultural history. His 'History of Hartlepool' (1816), reprinted in 1851 with an appendix by the publisher and historian John Proctor, still stands as the standard history of the ancient port and borough of Hartlepool. His 'Memorials of the Rebellion of 1569', culled from primary sources, was highly rated by nineteenth-century biographers. He also composed a large number of tracts and Durham family trees, many of which have since been proved inaccurate. 
Although he was registered as 'retired' and devoted himself to 'literary pursuits' (Brockie, 143) possibly from his twenties, Sharp also led an active public life. Living in Hartlepool after his return from France, he served as mayor in 1813, 1816, and 1824 and was knighted in 1814 'on presenting an address to the Prince Regent' (Latimer, 265). Between 1823 and 1845 his main residence was in Sunderland, where he was collector of customs for twenty-two years. From 1845 to 1849 he filled a similar position at the larger port of Newcastle upon Tyne. He was heavily involved in freemasonry, and rose from minor office in the Sunderland branch in the 1820s to the position of deputy provincial grand master of the province of Durham from 1832. He was also a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, having been recommended by Burney, among others, in 1810. He resigned in 1825 on account of financial problems. 
Brief nineteenth-century biographies afford some small insight into both Sharp's looks and character. Local legend in Sunderland held that Queen Victoria had once described him as 'the ugliest man that has come to my court' (Corder, MSS 33-4). Despite his apparent popularity at school and even as customs collector, he had family problems and feuded with his daughter, though they were reconciled late in his life. He had friends of consequence, including Robert Surtees, whom he helped with his 'History of Durham', and, through Surtees, Sir Walter Scott, who corresponded with Sharp in verse on antiquarian matters. 
Sharp was in poor health when he took up his new post in Newcastle in 1845. He was about to tender his resignation as customs collector when he died there, at his house in Northumberland Street, on 17 August 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 25208


Sharp, Granville (1735-1813), author and slavery abolitionist, was born at Durham on 10 November 1735. He was the scion of a clerical family, the ninth and youngest son of Thomas Sharp (1693-1758), archdeacon of Northumberland, and his wife, Judith Wheler (died 1757). His grandfather was John Sharp, archbishop of York; two of his brothers became Anglican clergymen. According to Prince Hoare, his first biographer, Granville: 'was at a very early age withdrawn from the public grammar-school at Durham, before he had gained more than the first rudiments of the learned languages, and was sent to a smaller school, to be instructed more particularly in writing and arithmetic. (Hoare, 27)' His father's straitened financial circumstances led to his being apprenticed in May 1750 to a Quaker linen draper named Halsey, of Tower Hill, London. On Halsey's death in 1753 he continued to serve his family and, in his own words, 'was turned over to a Presbyterian, or rather, as he was more properly called, an Independent. I afterwards lived some time with an Irish Papist, and also with another person, who, I believe, had no religion at all' (ibid., 28). These contacts encouraged Sharp to engage in theological disputation, and he used his leisure to acquire that largely self-taught knowledge of Greek and Hebrew which formed an important basis for his career as a writer. In 1757 he completed his apprenticeship and became a freeman of the City of London as a member of the Fishmongers' Company; the following year the failure of a linen business in which he was employed led him to accept a clerkship in the Ordnance office at the Tower. In 1764 he received promotion to the minuting branch as a clerk-in-ordinary. 
During this period Sharp's intellectual interests, particularly in the realms of biblical scholarship, linguistics, and antiquarianism, deepened. He researched into the claim of his former master, Henry Willoughby, to the barony of Willoughby of Parham; he published a reply to Benjamin Kennicott's 'Catalogue of the Sacred Vessels Restored by Cyrus' (1765), wrote 'A Short Treatise on the English Tongue' (1767), and completed a book on scriptural prophecies in 1768. Each of these works went into at least two editions, and it was largely on the strength of them that his maternal uncle Granville Wheler offered him a benefice at Great Leek, Nottinghamshire. Wheler was married to the sister of the ninth earl of Huntingdon, whose wife was the celebrated evangelical countess. The connection with evangelicalism remained with Sharp all his life. However, he declined both the offer and the suggestion that he take holy orders. 
In the mid-1760s Sharp became seriously interested in the abolition of slavery. His concern seems to have been occasioned in 1765 by his fortuitous encounter at the house of his brother William with a slave, Jonathan Strong. William Sharp had medical knowledge, and Strong was seeking treatment after sustaining injuries inflicted by his owner, David Lisle. Granville Sharp took up Strong's case, secured his release from prison when Lisle obtained his arrest as an escaped slave, and fought off a legal challenge which accused him of violating the owner's property rights. Thereafter Sharp, with characteristic devotion to research, applied himself to a detailed study of the legal status of slaves in Britain, as distinct from the colonies, and of the laws of civil liberty in Britain itself. An early result was 'A Representation of the Injustice and Dangerous Tendency of Tolerating Slavery' (1769). He began to correspond and collaborate with the Quaker abolitionist Anthony Benezet and (from 1773) the Philadelphia abolitionist Benjamin Rush. Soon he took up the cases of other slaves in England, such as Thomas Lewis. His efforts reached a climax with Lord Mansfield's celebrated judgment in the case of James Somerset (1772), which, although much debated subsequently, was widely interpreted as stating that any slave setting foot in England immediately became free. At all events, it was a massive propaganda victory for abolitionists, and Sharp was set on what became the most notable feature of his career. In 1776 he published several anti-slavery works including 'The Law of Liberty'. 
During these years Sharp followed closely the deterioration in the relations between Britain and her North American colonies. Strongly sympathetic to the colonial grievances, he associated himself with traditional whig and Commonwealth libertarian ideas, as espoused by such as Richard Price and John Cartwright. In his 'Declaration of the People's Natural Right to a Share in the Legislature' (1774) he argued for American representation in the Westminster parliament, claiming that such representation was consistent both with natural rights and with historic English liberties as enshrined in 'Magna Carta'. But, since he was 'patriot as well as a radical' (Bonwick, 74), he also deplored the idea of rebellion or American separation, and believed that appropriate reforms, such as the abandonment of parliamentary taxation, could preserve the unity of the empire. In particular he urged that 'we should strictly maintain our 'Loyalty' to the 'Crown', at the same time that we steadily assert our legal and constitutional Rights' (G. Sharp, 'Declaration', 1774, 42). He believed that those 'rights' were best safeguarded by measures of constitutional reform, and he argued strongly in favour of annual parliaments. 
In 1776 Sharp's opposition to the American War of Independence led him to resign from the Ordnance office. Thereafter he followed no formal profession and was supported by the generosity of his brothers William and James, together with the proceeds from his published works, of which sixty-one are listed in Hoare's biography. The onset of war gave Sharp a further cause to champion: opposition to the use of the press-gang for naval recruitment. In collaboration with James Oglethorpe, to whose 'Sailor's Advocate' he contributed an introduction, Sharp drew on his libertarian ideology and legal researches to take up an issue which drew widespread support. He was a persistent critic of the colonial and domestic policies of Lord North's administration, which he condemned in his 'Address to the People' (1778) as arbitrary and corrupt. He became one of the earliest members of the Society for Constitutional Information, founded in 1780; he corresponded with Christopher Wyvill, John Jebb, and other reformers; he wrote strongly against triennial parliaments as an insufficient measure; and he supported the legislative independence of the Irish parliament. In the belief that the ancient constitution represented people rather than property, and as an alternative to the universal suffrage for which he was not an enthusiast, Sharp advocated a revival of the Anglo-Saxon system of frankpledge. It would involve a system of administration from tithing courts to parliament, which would secure the involvement in government, and the preservation of the rights, of an active citizenry. He formulated these ideas in his 'Account of the Constitutional Polity of Congregational Courts' (1786). Parliamentary reform sat easily with Sharp's anti-slavery convictions; the Society for Constitutional Information supported a Quaker petition against the slave trade in 1783 and reprinted anti-slavery tracts. 
Throughout his life Sharp remained a member of the Church of England. Though he did not live in Clapham and was rather more radical than some members of the evangelical Clapham Sect, he was none the less associated with it, shared many of its moral priorities, and has been seen by historians of anti-slavery as 'a member of the Evangelical core group' (Anstey, 158) of abolitionists. After the British recognition of American independence in 1783 Sharp's Anglican commitment led him to campaign for the restoration of the episcopalian church in the former colonies. So anxious was he that there be no doubt about the legitimacy of a 'true episcopal succession' in America that he insisted, as he told Benjamin Rush, 'the first 'American Bishops' should rather receive their consecration from the hands of 3 or 4 of our 'English Bishops' than from the 'Nonjurors' of Scotland' (Woods, 27), as had happened with Samuel Seabury. His efforts were rewarded with the consecration of the bishops of New York and Pennsylvania in 1787. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' is incorrect in stating that Sharp was aided in this process by Archbishop Thomas Secker; Secker died in 1768. 
In common with many radicals Sharp compared the state of slavery to that of political reformers allegedly repressed by an unjust government in his own country. Like them, too, he was more concerned with constitutional issues than with the social grievances of the poor in Britain. The latter were not the legal property of others and, as he wrote to Bishop Porteus in 1795, 'the English labourer is protected at least from all personal ill usage and outrage by equal laws' (Anstey, 242-3) and could seek parish relief. From 1776 Sharp began to publish tracts on slavery and corresponded energetically with many leading members, lay and clerical, of the political establishment. In 1783 he tried, unsuccessfully, to institute a private prosecution for murder after the infamous 'Zong' incident (1781), when more than a hundred African slaves were thrown overboard from this slave ship in an effort to defraud the underwriters. When the anti-slavery movement began to organize nationwide petitioning campaigns Sharp was at the forefront. The Society for the Abolition of the Slave Trade was founded in 1787. When its London committee was set up on 22 May 1787 he was one of its twelve founding members -- and one of only three who were not Quakers. Sharp urged the movement to campaign for the immediate abolition of slavery itself as well as the trade, but was in a minority of one. He none the less gave his full endorsement to the motions for the abolition of the British slave trade introduced in the House of Commons by William Wilberforce. Sharp, together with Thomas Clarkson, provided much of the essential information for the abolitionist campaign. He met William Pitt to discuss the matter, and on the outbreak of the French Revolution he corresponded with several French sympathizers in the national assembly. With Clarkson and Wilberforce he helped to sponsor the establishment of a colony for freed slaves at Sierra Leone and published a 'Short Sketch' for its government in 1786. Sharp was also one of the first directors of the St George's Company, which managed the settlement until it was ceded to the crown in 1808, and he became one of the first directors of the African Institution in 1807. 
A combination of mobilization and a change in the religious and intellectual climate had brought much public support to abolitionism since 1788, the year of the first major petitioning movement. In 1792 the House of Commons passed a motion for gradual abolition which faded away in House of Lords committees. The rearguard resistance of the West Indian interest, and fear of the dangers of reform in an atmosphere of potential revolution, inhibited the cause in the later 1790s. Sharp continued to write on the subject, notably in his 'Serious Reflections on the Slave Trade and Slavery Wrote in March 1797', published in 1805. He also remained vigorous in the cause of parliamentary reform during that decade. In 1802 he was 'almost alone' in protesting against the re-enslavement of free blacks in the conquered French Caribbean islands (Drescher, 105). 
The suggestion that Sharp was not a 'real evangelical' (Cooper, 435) is undermined by his missionary zeal, some of which found expression through his membership of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and his contribution to the foundation of the British and Foreign Bible Society, of which he became the first chairman in 1804. He shared some of the anti-Roman Catholicism espoused by many evangelicals, and in 1813 served as the first chairman of the Protestant Union, a body which existed to oppose Catholic emancipation. His defenders insisted that for all his anti-Catholicism, he 'lived in habits of friendship and intimacy' with individual Catholics (Hoare, 478). Sharp used his biblical researches to take part in a significant theological debate. His 'Remarks on the Uses of the Definitive Article in the Greek Text of the New Testament' (1798; 3rd edn, 1803) argued strongly for the divinity of Christ and struck a blow against the Socinian position; Benjamin Rush credited the work with the conversion of a (previously) anti-Trinitarian clergyman near Philadelphia (Woods, 36). As a memoirist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' put it, Sharp: 'was sensible that the religion of the divine Saviour and Redeemer of the world requires something more than a cold and indolent assent of the understanding; that it imperiously calls for an entire change in the dispositions of the heart. ('GM', 88, 1818, 491)' Music was important in Sharp's social life. He himself played a harp of his own design, and his family formed an orchestra which delighted in musical trips by boat on the Thames, during which they entertained royalty and were charmingly portrayed by J. J. Zoffany. In 1767 Sharp found time to write 'A Short Introduction to Vocal Music'; it went into a second edition ten years later. His other interests reflected his energy as well as his eccentricity. They included an idea for issuing bales of wool to protect British soldiers in the Peninsular War; a plan to extend London parish relief to all the poor, irrespective of their origin; an insistence that Napoleon was the 'little horn' of the book of 'Daniel'; and more than a passing interest in the sense of the imminence of the apocalypse, widespread in intellectual as well as popular circles at this time. He lived mainly in Garden Court, Temple, London, until the death of his brother William, when he resided with the latter's widow at Fulham. After a gradual physical and mental decline he died there, unmarried, on 6 July 1813 and was buried in All Saints' churchyard, Fulham on 13 July. 
Although Sharp was never a popular or even accessible writer, his work was of immense importance to the anti-slavery movement in Britain. It was partly through his efforts that it gained public attention and sympathy and that it transformed itself from a benign climate of opinion to a highly organized campaign. Thomas Clarkson regarded him as a founder of the movement; according to the whig Francis Horner, he was one of those who had started it. He was predictably criticized in West Indian circles, which questioned his motivation; they accused him, for instance, of proposing to withhold charity from the black poor in London to force them to leave for Sierra Leone (Drescher, 258, n. 74). None the less, he attracted remarkably few personal enemies. Sharp had an exceptionally wide circle of friends, and could win affection as well as respect. James Stephen credited him with 'the most inflexible of human wills united to the gentlest of human hearts' and opined that his life was evidence that 'it was too soon to proclaim that the age of chivalry was gone' (Stephen, 2.314). 


@@@@@


doc= 25209


Sharp, Isaac (1806-1897), missionary, elder son of Isaac Sharp of Brighton, Sussex, and his first wife, Mary Likeman, was born in Brighton on 4 July 1806. His father had joined the Society of Friends upon his marriage, and at eleven the son was sent to a Quaker school at Earl's Colne, Essex. At twenty-four he went to Darlington as private secretary to Joseph Pease, succeeding afterwards to the management of the Pease estate near Middlesbrough. In February 1839, he married Hannah Procter; they had two daughters before her death, four years after the marriage. 
Sharp first began to preach about 1832, and in 1843 was 'recorded' a minister by Darlington monthly meeting. From this body he afterwards received on forty-five separate occasions certificates or credentials for gospel travel at home and abroad. He began his journeys in 1846 by visits to Norway, Orkney and Shetland, and Iceland, the Faeroes, Denmark, Greenland, and Labrador. But it was not until he was past sixty that he embarked upon the wider range of sustained missionary activity, to which the remaining years of his life were devoted. 
In 1877 Sharp started for the southern hemisphere. He was welcomed at Cape Town by members of all denominations, including Sir David Tennant and Lady Frere, in the absence of her husband, Sir Henry Bartle Edward Frere, then governor of Cape Colony. Sharp travelled in a cape cart northward to Shoshong, visited King Khama, and was at Kuruman shortly before the outbreak of the Anglo-Zulu War. Reaching Kimberley in September 1878 he was invited to take up his quarters at Government House. After visiting the French missions in Basutoland, he left for Madagascar, where an important station had been founded by the Society of Friends. He next travelled to Sydney, Melbourne, and other Australian towns, then to Stewart Island and New Zealand, and thence to San Francisco, the United States, and Mexico. On his way eastward he made contact with the American Quaker poet John Greenleaf Whittier. Sharp finally returned to England, after seven years' absence, in March 1884. 
In 1891, when in his eighty-fifth year, and in spite of a complaint which at times made him dependent upon surgical aid and skilled nursing, his buoyant faith and spirits induced him to set out on another long voyage. In the face of much opposition, medical and otherwise, and a severe illness in Paris, he started for the East, and was able to carry out a long-cherished plan of visiting Constantinople, India, Japan, and the interior of China. 
A fortnight after his return to England Sharp set out on his eighth visit to Norway. Some weeks spent in Syria during the autumn of 1895 proved to be his final evangelical tour. On nearly the last day of 1896 he lectured to a large audience at Devonshire House, Bishopsgate, on his foreign experiences as a missionary, but on returning home he caught a cold. He died on 21 March 1897, aged ninety, at his home, the Coffee House, Ettington, Warwickshire, and was buried on 26 March in the Quaker burial-ground close by. 
Isaac Sharp's short robust figure, twinkling eyes, and alert manner, to the last utterly belied his years. Possessed of a peculiarly musical voice, his preaching, like himself, exhaled love. A ready fund of anecdote and humour endeared him to the inmates of lonely mission stations and isolated dwellings from the northern to the southern polar circle, no less than to all in England. An excellent correspondent, he expressed himself as readily in verse as in prose. 


@@@@@


doc= 25210


Perkins, William (d. 1431), rebel and alleged Lollard, was the bailiff of Abingdon, whose name is recorded in official documents as William Perkins but given in some chronicles as Maundeville. His public appearance as a rebel under the name Jack Sharp covers only a few days in 1431, but he may have been a man accused by an approver in 1424, and was almost certainly identical with one whose arrest was ordered in 1427 to answer to 'divers transgressions'. In neither of these earlier cases, however, is there any suspicion that he was accused of heresy. The troubles of 1431 apparently began in London in March, but there were more widespread manifestations of discontent in the south midlands and as far north as Coventry. Plots were afoot at Abingdon in April, and on 9 May open disorder broke out at Salisbury. Perkins may have been present at the Salisbury riots, but his main share in the revolt was six days later, when he led a group of rebels from East Hendred to attack Abingdon Abbey. The troubles created considerable alarm in government circles, for the protector, Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (died 1447), found it necessary to ride from Greenwich to Oxford to deal with the rising personally. After its failure Perkins took flight, but he was captured in Oxford, tried before Gloucester, condemned, and beheaded -- an appropriate fate for a traitor -- with seven others. His prominence in the rising, which is suggested by the chroniclers, is confirmed by the fact that his head was set on London Bridge as a deterrent to other rebels. 
The nature of 'Sharp's revolt' is uncertain. It was strongly anti-clerical, because bills were circulated in the form of a petition to parliament, based on the Lollard disendowment bill of 1410, which in turn looked back to proposals voiced in 1395. There is however little evidence of doctrinal irregularity, and it is significant that Perkins was executed rather than burnt. Only one chronicle source refers to a case of eucharistic heresy during the upheaval, and there was nothing to connect Perkins with this. The pseudonym 'Jack Sharp of Wigmoreland', which he assumed, has both social and political overtones. The first half echoes such names as 'Jack Straw' with the implication of peasant discontent, while the second may well be hinting at the Mortimer territorial base inherited by Richard, duke of York (died 1460), who represented an alternative claim to the throne. It may well have been these latter elements, as much as the anti-clerical tone of the manifesto, that prompted the authorities to suppress it so ruthlessly. 


@@@@@


doc= 25211


Sharp, James (1618-1679), archbishop of St Andrews, was born at Banff Castle on 4 May 1618, one of three sons of William Sharp (died 1638), sheriff clerk of Banff (1617), and Isobel Lesley, daughter of the laird of Kinninvy. 
Sharp's father was a servant of the earl of Buchan, and beneficiary of the patronage of the earl of Findlater, whom he had served earlier; he was also elder in the Banff parish. 'A True and Impartial Account of the Life of... Sharp' (1723) gives William a pedigree among the landed classes: his father was an Aberdeen merchant born to a 'gentleman in Perthshire'; his maternal grandmother belonged to a lairdly family from Forfarshire. James went to the new (1620) grammar school in Banff. In 1633 he entered King's College, Aberdeen, where he studied under John Forbes of Corse, professor of theology at the college. There he imbibed its tradition of ecclesiastical moderation, upheld by the Aberdeen doctors, who were Augustinians in theology, shared a wide commitment to patristic learning, and were willing to embrace ceremony in worship, a moderate episcopacy generally without notions of the 'jus divinum' in polity, and royal supremacy over the church. 
In 1638 -- perhaps following the introduction in February of the national covenant -- Sharp journeyed to England, intending to obtain preferment in the English church. He visited both universities, but there is no evidence that he did in fact find a position in England, and early in 1642 he was a regent at St Andrews University. Clearly he had by then set aside possible scruples and subscribed the national covenant; it may have been with the help of Alexander Henderson, the clerical leader of the covenanting movement, and also John Leslie, seventh earl of Rothes, an aristocratic insider in the movement and Sharp's kinsman on his mother's side, that he obtained this position. The 'Life of Mr James Sharp' (1719) states that while at St Andrews, Sharp fathered and murdered an illegitimate child, but the allegation is entirely lacking in credibility; more credence may be given to a story which has him involved in a fight at the table with another regent, John Sinclair. In 1648 the earl of Crawford presented Sharp to the parish of Crail, a royal burgh in Fife, and within the presbytery of St Andrews. 
Sharp was appointed a synod delegate from the presbytery, then a member of a search committee for faculty at St Andrews. In 1649, and again in 1650, he was sought as pastor for Edinburgh. On the second occasion the general assembly permitted his transfer, but Cromwell's intervention in the country meant that nothing came of the project. In April 1653 Sharp married Helen Moncrieff, daughter of the laird of Randerston. They had seven children: Sir William, who succeeded his father in the barony of Scotscraig; John; Isabella, who married John Cunningham of Barns; Catherine; Margaret, who married William, Lord Saltoun; and another daughter who married Erskine of Cambo. 
Sharp's career in the 1650s was defined by the rupture of the kirk between the radical protesters or remonstrants and the resolutioners, the more moderate group with which Sharp identified. He was elected a member of the commission of the general assembly in 1650, and first attended its sessions on 13 September 1650, ten days after Oliver Cromwell defeated the Scottish army at Dunbar. There he began his work of mediation between the two parties, seeking to avoid a lasting split, although this occurred in July 1651. Following the disaster at Worcester in August 1651 Sharp and others were detained by Cromwell and he spent nearly a year in London, though in April 1652 he was bailed from the Tower, perhaps because he was then only a minor player. He returned to his parish by August, and in January 1653 was a resolutioner representative to a unity conference. In October 1654 he was moderator of the provincial synod which declared itself against Gillespie's charter, a compromise with Cromwellian governance of the church. Still, Sharp showed himself a willing negotiator, trying always to avoid breakdowns in communication and rigid positions; thus he was willing to bargain away public prayers for the king in exchange for various freedoms. 
When the protesters prepared to send a delegation to London to advance their own cause the resolutioners countered with Sharp, who went south late in 1656 in the company of Lord Broghill; it was during this trip that he saw a resolutioner apology through the press, 'A true representation of the rise, progress, and state of the present division in the Church of Scotland'. Sharp built support among the local church leaders in London and succeeded in blocking the protesters' plans before returning to Scotland towards the end of 1657. In February 1659 he returned to London to treat with Richard Cromwell, but the army's intervention leading to Cromwell's abdication left Sharp exposed as a royalist and he was interrogated before the council. He was ordered to return to Scotland on 29 June, having achieved but little. In December he wrote an explanatory document for General George Monck, who was about to enter England to effect the restoration of the house of Stewart. The 'Declaration of his intentions in marching into England with his army' denounced usurpation by the current English regime and identified the army's goal as 'the recovery of the just liberties and freedoms of the people' (Buckroyd, 45). Sharp returned to his diplomatic duties in London in February 1660. During this time the resolutioner party finally achieved ascendancy over the protesters, and Sharp attempted to defend the loyalty of the resolutioners and make them acceptable to the king. He sailed for Breda on 4 May and returned to England with the court, arriving on 25 May. He was under pressure from Scotland to remind the king of the covenant, but this notion of the direction of events was far from reality, though the king did utter affectionate words about Scotland and promised to call a general assembly of the church. Sharp arrived in Scotland on 31 August 1660. Thereafter he wrote of his confident expectation of a presbyterian future at least for Scotland, though it is also clear that already some were beginning to suspect that he was conspiring to effect a change, which he vigorously denied -- 'I am a Scot and a Presbyter' (Airy, 1.52) -- and ridiculed alleged ambition in the light of the reception one might hope for as a bishop in Scotland. He did, however, make clear his belief that the church must be so ordered as to remove any conflicts with 'the king's interest', but the king had smiled at this and told Sharp that 'you will be counted a malignant when you come home' (ibid., 1.48). 
Sharp was under pressure to leave Crail for Edinburgh, but in fact on 16 January 1661 he moved back to St Andrews, becoming third master at St Mary's College and professor of divinity -- much against Samuel Rutherford's wishes. He also assumed duties as king's chaplain in Scotland. Sharp's confidence in the presbyterian future of Scotland was soon eclipsed by the actions of the Scottish parliament. The 'Act Rescissory' and the 'Act Concerning Religion and Church Government' on 28 March did not end presbytery, but the language was ambiguous and imposed the royal supremacy in the determination of church polity. The drift of events cast Sharp's actions and his policy of moderation in a bad light -- Robert Baillie expressed a mild concern in a letter to the earl of Lauderdale on 18 April. 
In late April Sharp departed for London again to negotiate about, but not for, the church, in that his appointment was from the parliamentary commissioner, John Middleton, first earl of Middleton, and not the church. He was willing to give up certain elements of presbytery, permitting the institution of constant moderators in the presbyteries; he hoped thereby to avoid worse infringements. The episcopal party, led by Middleton, was in power, and it was clear that without the establishment of episcopacy Scotland would remain an occupied country. Sharp was confronted with a choice, whereby he could hold to his presbyterianism and lose all, 'or he could resign himself to the inevitable, go along with the change and try to ensure that it conformed at least to some extent with the desires of Scots churchmen' (Buckroyd, 71). Given both his personality and his moderate opinions on church government, he submitted to the inevitable. On 6 August Alexander Brodie of Brodie recorded in his diary that in London he had met Sharp, who related 'what conflicts he had heir to hold out unworthi men from being Bishops' ('Diary', ed. Laing, 201) and to withstand the attempts of English bishops to force their own choices on Scotland. On 6 September a proclamation concerning episcopacy was read in Edinburgh, and Sharp, now back in Scotland, became an agent for the new scheme; Baillie said he was poisoned by Gilbert Sheldon, then bishop of London, and George Morley, bishop of Winchester, and sought to recruit resolutioners to serve as bishops, an attempt which miscarried entirely. He returned to London on 15 October. On 14 November he was nominated to the archiepiscopal see of St Andrews, and on 15 December was consecrated in Westminster Abbey by Sheldon and Morley, using the prayer book, 'but without prejudice to the privileges of the Church of Scotland' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 171). With him three others were also consecrated: Andrew Fairfoul for Glasgow, Robert Leighton for Dunblane, and James Hamilton for Galloway. Sharp and Leighton were compelled to re-enter orders as deacons then as priests since their presbyterian ordinations were invalidated, though Sharp initially opposed this demand. Such a policy was not, however, generally pursued back in Scotland with regard to the parochial clergy. 
Archbishop Sharp returned, in the splendour of a new coach bought in London, complete with 'two lakqueys in purple', to Edinburgh on 8 April 1662, with Fairfoul and Hamilton, while Leighton boycotted the pomp and ceremony. On the 15th and 16th he journeyed through Fife to his see, and on the 17th he preached on '1 Corinthians' 2: 2, in which he justified his actions, claiming 'that he was ever in his judgment for Episcopacy and the ceremonies' ('Life of Robert Blair', 405). On 7 May he participated in the consecration, performed with great ceremony and using the prayer book, of another six bishops in Edinburgh, and on 8 May the bishops returned to parliament as the traditional ecclesiastical estate. On 17 May parliament passed an act restoring episcopal government. With two more consecrations in St Andrews on 3 June the Scottish episcopate had been resuscitated. Beginning in late September the government began its harassment of nonconforming ministers, and Sharp evinced concern about the direction of policy. But by now he had allied himself with the government and against the presbyterians, and already his policy of moderation leading to unity was under strain. He again visited London in early 1663, and upon his return in June he and Fairfoul were brought into the privy council, where his accession to more rigorous action became apparent, as in the instance of Andrew Donaldson, minister of Dalgetty, whom he forced out against the wishes of the earl of Dunfermline, lord privy seal. Another trip -- of which a detailed financial account survives in the archbishop's household book (pp. 37-59) -- to London in December lasted until February 1664, and his achievement this time was the church commission which assumed the privy council's work in combating nonconformity. In 1664 he went to London to lobby for appointment to the chancellor's post. This attempt failed, but until 1666 Sharp and his old ally, John Leslie, earl of Rothes, were supreme in Scotland. However, the Scottish political nation grew discontent with Sharp's apparent usurpation of the political power it coveted -- Sir John Lauder of Fountainhall stated that John Cunningham, earl of Glencairn, and even Rothes, as chancellors, would never grant Sharp the precedency he was supposed to receive -- and by late 1666 his rising star began to pale. The Pentland rising in November was suppressed and a defeat inflicted on the rebels at Rullion Green on 28 November. His efficient direction of the suppression became the pretext for his disgrace, and from 1 February 1667 until 4 July he was absent from the privy council; he came close to losing his position, and for some months attended only to diocesan duties. 
Sharp was now clearly subordinated to the regime headed by John Maitland, earl of Lauderdale, so that his vision for an independent church governed by a moderate episcopacy was in ruins, the archbishop was regarded with suspicion by the landed classes and government, and he was alienated from a vocal part of the church. The extremity of the situation was manifested when James Mitchell made an attempt on his life on 11 July 1668, in Edinburgh. Sharp was uninjured, but Andrew Honeyman, bishop of Orkney, was wounded in the arm. Burnet claimed that 'Sharp was so universally hated, that, tho' this was done in the full day light, and on the high street, yet no body offered to seize the assassin' ('Bishop Burnet's History'). This episode notwithstanding, the policy of repression which Sharp had come to advocate was now superseded by Bishop Robert Leighton's accommodation, supported by the Lauderdale administration; Sharp's co-operation was secured while he visited London in the months August to November. Leighton's episcopal policies trod lightly on the unwilling, giving more power to the rank and file of clergy in synods, recalling Bishop William Cowper's programme of bishop-in-presbytery during the Jacobean era. On 7 June 1669 was issued the first indulgence, whereby forty-two presbyterians were allowed back to their parishes under restrictions, but without any demand for acceptance of episcopacy. Sharp disliked the reversal but was powerless to stop it. His colleague in the see of Glasgow, Alexander Burnet, also ran afoul of the political class and in late 1669 was forced to resign. On 16 November parliament passed the 'Act of Supremacy' -- much against Sharp's judgement -- whereby the king gained 'Supream Authority and Supremacie over all persons and in all causes ecclesiasticall within this kingdom' (Dickinson, Croft, and Donaldson, 3.160). Sharp therefore had no choice but to participate in Leighton's transfer to Glasgow, which took place, against Leighton's first wishes, in April 1670. 
In fact Sharp was very nearly a cipher in these years -- he was not even consulted about the vacant see of Edinburgh, and the 1672 indulgence went ahead without his concurrence. But another change came when the accommodation scheme failed to bring in the determined radical presbyterians. In spring 1674 the synod of Fife expressed its discontent with the confusion aroused by the radicals and Sharp took the message to Lauderdale. The church was now on the verge of schism between hardline episcopalians and moderates who supported Leighton, whose resignation was ultimately accepted in August 1674. Now a political struggle broke out pitting Lauderdale against William Douglas-Hamilton, duke of Hamilton, and this encouraged a reconciliation between Sharp and Lauderdale. If he was subjected to public intimidation in Edinburgh in June 1674, his political position was bolstered by the restoration of Burnet to the see of Glasgow in September 1674, while an episcopal opponent, James Ramsey of Dunblane, was suspended. Sharp was in London from August 1674 to August 1675, and when he returned he was once again the master of the church and went ahead with a strident programme against nonconformity, including the Highland Host. In his final years his moral stature was much diminished by his defence of the dubious judicial proceedings against the presbyterian James Kirkton and then his role in the sordid affair which led to the execution of James Mitchell, who had attempted to assassinate him in 1668. Sharp perjured himself in order to disoblige the government of promises of leniency. He was now a hostage to the fortune of the sometimes beleaguered Lauderdale. There were also rumours to the effect that the archbishop and his wife were at odds with each other, 'objecting, adulteri and incest the one, and witchcraft the other' ('Diary', ed. Laing, 350). While almost certainly false, these allegations hint at the archbishop's reputation among his foes. 
The end came quickly on 3 May 1679. A band of nine conventiclers in Fife, two lairds, a weaver, and six tenant farmers, had plotted mischief against the local sheriff depute, but when they heard that Sharp was driving home to St Andrews they changed their target and chased down the carriage on Magus Moor near St Andrews; they shot and stabbed the archbishop to death before his daughter Isabella's eyes. A somewhat muddled investigation followed, leading to the executions of David Hackstone of Rathillet and Andrew Guillan, a weaver. William Dingwall perished at Drumclog a month after the murder; the other six escaped. Sharp's funeral was conducted at Holy Trinity Church, St Andrews, on 17 May. Among the bequests made from his estate was a gift of 1000 marks to aid the poor of Banff (Foster, 63). 
The presbyterian tradition has been merciless to Sharp. Before his 'treachery', Robert Baillie had written: 'You were the most wise, honest, diligent, and successfull agent of the nation in the late dangers of our Church in Cromwell's tyme.... Since first acquaintance yow have ever been very faithfull and loving to myself in all occasions' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.473). After his consecration he was regarded as a traitor. One contemporary poem was entitled 'Misanthropos, Judas, Scoto-Brittanus his Lyfe, Lamentatione and Legacie'. The seventieth stanza has Sharp confess: '
My master Judas was more stout 

Then I his schollar faint 

and the more honest was in that 

he shooner did recant. 
(NL Scot., Wodrow MSS, Octavo xxix, no. 11, 113'r'-128'v'; stanza 70, pt 1, 119'v')' James Kirkton, who had reason to hold a grudge, wrote that Sharp's 'great gift was his prudence, dissimulation, and industry, which qualified him well for his terrible undertakings. He was by all that knew him taken to be no better than a state atheist; he used no private prayers, and once in a month served his family: yea, he was known to be a man of flagitious life, and not only a debauched pailliard, but a cruel murtherer. (Kirkton, 83)' His modern biographer believes that Sharp's interpreters have commonly 'ante-dated his corruption' (Buckroyd, 118), but even if one is generous in dating the fall, Sharp's final years left ample opportunity for him to stain his historical record, beyond the mere fact of a realist inclined to make strategic retreats by clutching to position, if not power, at all costs. As happened over the previous century, the episcopate all too frequently was episcopalianism's worst enemy. 


@@@@@


doc= 25212


Sharp, John (1572-1647), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born in Edinburgh, of unknown parentage. Educated at the University of St Andrews, he graduated MA in 1592. A theologian of considerable renown, his first work, 'Theses theologicae de peccato', was published at Edinburgh in 1600. In 1601 Sharp became minister of Kilmany in Fife. A staunch presbyterian he was appointed clerk to the general assembly of 1605 which met in Aberdeen in defiance of the command of James VI. Ordered before the privy council to explain his conduct, Sharp, along with five other ministers, declined the authority of the court as incompetent to judge a purely ecclesiastical question. The six ministers were subsequently confined in Blackness Castle and charged with treason. The case was heard before a packed jury at Linlithgow in January 1606, and Sharp, together with his five colleagues, was banished for life. 
Sharp went to France, and in 1608 he was appointed professor of theology in the college of Die in Dauphine. He was a prolific author, whose writings included the 'Tractatus de justificatione hominis coram Deo' (Geneva, 1609); 'Tractatus de misero hominis satu sub peccato' (Geneva, 1610); and 'Symphonia prophetarum et apostolorum' (Geneva, 1625). Sharp's support for a restoration of presbyterianism in Scotland remained constant throughout his time in exile. 
In 1618 John Spottiswood, archbishop of St Andrews, indicated that Sharp's recall was imminent and the minister dedicated his 'Cursus theologicus' to James in the hope of a reconciliation. Negotiations collapsed, however, on Sharp's refusal to submit to the episcopalian regime. The minister remained at Die for a further twelve years until his protestant teachings brought him into conflict with the French government. Taking advantage of Charles I's moratorium on the prosecution of dissident ministers Sharp returned to London in 1630, where 'the town council of Edinburgh, hearing that Mr John Sharp... was by Cardinal Richelieu's procurement thrust out of France... thought fit to give him a call to the professor of Divinity in [the latter] Colledge' (Craufurd, 117). He took up the post in November that year. 
Probably after 1630 Sharp married Agnes Davidson. The couple had a daughter, Marie, baptized on 18 August 1640, and a son, John, baptized on 8 August 1641. In 1637 Sharp sided with the covenanting party, and, in that year, signed the supplication against the prayer book raised by the presbytery of Edinburgh. He died, probably at Edinburgh, in 1647. 


@@@@@


doc= 25213


Sharp, John (1645?-1714), archbishop of York, was born at Ivegate, Bradford, probably on 16 February 1645, the eldest of five children. His father was Thomas Sharp, a wet and dry salter; his mother, Dorothy, 'nee' Weddal, was the eldest daughter of John Weddal of Widdington, Yorkshire. The Sharps were a well-established Yorkshire family, mainly clothiers and farmers on a small scale. Sharp was baptized in Bradford parish church by an episcopally ordained minister, a fact which gave him great satisfaction in later life: by that time in the civil war the officiant might not have received episcopal ordination, and so would have been regarded by Sharp as a layman. Sharp's father was a devout puritan and a parliamentarian follower of Sir Thomas Fairfax and his mother an Anglican and royalist. Sharp admired his father's piety but was more influenced by his mother's devotion to the prayer book. He was educated at Bradford grammar school and in 1660 entered Christ's College, Cambridge. In 1663 he graduated BA and thereupon concentrated on the study of divinity; he proceeded MA in 1667, though he failed to gain a fellowship. 
That year Sharp was ordained deacon and priest at the same service by special dispensation. At Cambridge he had been influenced by Henry More, who recommended him as chaplain and tutor to Sir Heneage Finch, then solicitor-general and later lord chancellor. Finch gained Sharp promotion to the archdeaconry of Berkshire in 1673 and, in 1675, to a prebend in Norwich and to the London parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields. In this important cure he was to remain for sixteen years, until he became archbishop of York. In April 1676 Sharp married Elizabeth Palmer of a well-known Lincolnshire family, the ceremony being performed by his friend and neighbour at St Lawrence Jewry, John Tillotson. In common with other rising London clergymen, Sharp now devoted himself to the hard-working life of a model parish priest. He fully shared the parochial visiting in this mainly poor and malodorous area with his two or three curates; about his preaching he took immense pains, preparing 'the diction as well as the matter', to avoid, as Gilbert Burnet (who reckoned him a good preacher) said, any danger of 'flatness' (Sharp, 'Life', 1.39-40). His son and biographer said of his preaching that 'his great excellence lay in representing the truths of religion with such plainness and unaffected simplicity as was... very persuasive and affecting' (ibid., 1.24). With preaching went catechizing, in which he excelled owing to his 'very kind, warm way of talking' on religious matters (ibid., 1.45). In 1681 Sharp was nominated to the deanery of Norwich, which he held in tandem with his London rectory. He instituted an inquiry into the revenues of the cathedral, but seems mainly to have seen Norwich as providing the opportunity 'of improving in his spiritual life through the advantages of retirement and disengagement from company and business which Norwich afforded him' (ibid., 1.51). 
Back in London, Sharp fell foul of the new Roman Catholic king. In common with many others he was concerned to refute Roman Catholicism. For him this took the form of a series of sermons at St Giles's starting in May 1686. The king commanded Henry Compton, the bishop of London, to suspend him from preaching. This Compton felt he could not do, because Sharp had not been properly tried for his offence; but he 'advised him to forbear the pulpit' ('King James's Ecclesiastical Commission', 20). Compton was summoned before the recently created ecclesiastical commission and, when he insisted that the king could not command something which was unlawful, he was suspended and the diocese put into commission. Compton had proved himself a thorn in the royal flesh on several occasions, and it is clear that the king used the Sharp incident to engineer his downfall. In 1687 Sharp continued with his series of sermons without hindrance, demonstrating that he had been a pawn in a higher game. 
Sharp also engaged himself in controversy at the other end of the ecclesiastical spectrum. In 1684 he produced his only written work. This was a pamphlet, 'A Discourse Concerning Conscience', which in 1686 was incorporated into a two-volume 'Collection of cases... written to recover dissenters to the communion of the Church of England', contributed by leading Anglicans. After a casuistical examination of the nature of conscience Sharp applies his findings to the separation of dissenters from the church. Here he takes a typical high-church standpoint, emphasizing the seriousness of separation and schism. If a dissenter feels it would actually be sinful for him to join the established church, then continued separation is permissible; but there are other reasons for separation, such as education, friendship, or force of habit, which are not excusable. Those who practise occasional conformity but remain outside the church are doing so for worldly reasons: 'with what conscience dare they do it at all?' ('Discourse', 40). Sharp makes a powerful case and one which was obviously heartfelt. His thinking was not Erastian, but rather based on Augustine and Aquinas. The former had believed that schismatics should be 'compelled to enter' the church, a tactic which many high-churchmen after the Restoration favoured; the latter, closely followed by Sharp, had differentiated between various operations of conscience. In Sharp 'a high church sensibility, authoritarian yet plainly pastoral, prevailed over erastian arguments' (Goldie, 'The theory of religious intolerance', 358). 
Sharp took no immediate part in the invitation to William to come to England, but in January 1689 he was involved in London meetings to discuss the complicated permutations of the constitutional settlement. On 30 January 1689 he preached before the House of Commons and prayed for King James, which was legally correct. Two days earlier the Commons had passed the bill pronouncing the abdication of James and the consequent vacancy of the throne, but the bill had not yet gone through the Lords. Nevertheless, it was a courageous act on Sharp's part, and the Commons were duly -- though temporarily -- incensed. At this time of dynastic confusion the state prayers were something of a litmus test for the clergy, and it may have been that, in praying for James, Sharp was intending to reserve his position for as long as possible. 
Two issues important for the constitution of the established church were debated in the revolution settlement -- comprehension in the church to encourage dissenters to enter its fold, and toleration for those who continued to refuse. Moves to comprehension suffered an early blow when, after a disastrously tactless speech from the throne from William, who did not understand the English ecclesiastical scene, parliament threw out the proposals in March 1689. But a commission was appointed to prepare proposals for comprehension to be presented to convocation. Sharp was one of ten bishops and twenty dignitaries appointed to this commission. The preamble to its instructions struck an eirenic note, granting that in matters 'indifferent' in church affairs 'changes and alterations should be made therein, as to those that are in place and authority, should from time to time seem either necessary or expedient' (T. Birch, 'Tillotson', 1783, 180). That said, the nonconformists were to be presented with an Anglican 'fait accompli', rather than being involved in the discussions. These centred mainly on the alterations to the liturgy, rather than on the review of the canons and the reform of the church courts. There was evidently no discussion of the thorny issue of nonconformist ordinations. However, the plans were scotched by the high-churchmen in convocation after Sharp had failed to engineer the election of Tillotson as prolocutor. William immediately adjourned convocation, which did not meet again for ten years. Although some high-churchmen at the time were averse to any scheme of comprehension which involved compromise -- as introducing schism into the church itself -- it may be assumed, because of his efforts in convocation, that Sharp approved the plans. 
This left the 'Toleration Bill' which had been proceeding through parliament. When it passed it was not as 'liberal' as some might have hoped, partly because it had originally been drafted to deal with hard-core dissenters who had refused the comprehension offer. Sharp may not have regretted this. In 1694 when Archbishop Tenison tried briefly to revive the comprehension issue he asked Sharp for his copy of the earl of Nottingham's 1689 papers -- the Finch connection again. 
Sharp was one of the seven senior clergymen recommended by Burnet, William's chief ecclesiastical adviser, for early promotion to bishoprics. However, because of his refusal to take a see made vacant by a nonjuror (Norwich was the obvious suggestion, but he would not fill the shoes of his friend the nonjuring Bishop William Lloyd) this promotion was delayed. Instead, in September 1689 he became dean of Canterbury, John Tillotson having become archbishop. But when Archbishop Thomas Lamplugh of York died, the way was open for Sharp, and on 5 July 1691 he was consecrated archbishop by Tillotson. While his friend was at Canterbury the two archbishops worked harmoniously together. For example in 1692 when Tillotson launched a programme of clerical reform Sharp was included in the consultation. Once in York, Sharp set about his work in a typically thorough manner, starting with the compilation of a four-volume survey of the diocese. A feature of his long reign of twenty-two years was that with two exceptions, unlike other bishops, he steadily refused to grant lucrative offices to well-connected suitors; rather, he promoted worthy clergymen from within the diocese to prebendal stalls or to the major parishes at his disposal. The exceptions were his two former pupils, the sons of his patron, now Lord Nottingham. Henry Finch was appointed in 1695 to the richest prebendal stall in the minster. Sharp hoped to promote him to the deanery but was twice thwarted by the king. Finally, in 1704 Henry achieved the deanery, to be succeeded in his stall by his brother, Edward. Sharp refused to become involved in parliamentary elections, and would give no guidance in the matter to his clergy. Instead he concentrated on the pastoral and administrative aspects of his work. Lamplugh had been seventy-six when he died, and consequently the diocese was not in very good shape when Sharp succeeded. 
The keystone to more vigorous administration was Sharp's use of his triennial visitations, following in the footsteps of the annual visitations of the archdeacons. He could also mount metropolitan visitations in the three dioceses of the province, especially when these were 'sede vacante'. Sharp was as punctilious as possible in this work, though weakness in his later years made it difficult; also, it was confined to the six months in which he was resident in the diocese, roughly from Easter to the early autumn when his parliamentary and other duties called him back to London. In May 1693 Sharp undertook a visitation of the collegiate church of Southwell, where it was clear that discipline and administration had become very slack. He asked a detailed and searching set of questions and received evasive answers. In March 1694 he returned with a fierce set of injunctions, especially concerning absenteeism and the dilapidations on the chapter property. These were not popular but were obeyed and continued in force. A set of visitation articles for the diocese of Chester 'sede vacante' show Sharp at his best: they follow much the same lines as those in other dioceses but are more detailed and specific, especially on the questions concerning property and residence. Moreover the preliminary 'Advertisement' is unusual: the parson and churchwardens are to meet 'divers times to deliberate and confer about' the articles and to answer 'particularly, advisedly and truly according to their consciences' (Borth. Inst., V.1707/visitation papers). Thus Sharp turned an inquisition into a pastoral opportunity. 
In other aspects of his episcopal ministry Sharp 'set a signal example of personal care and devotion to public duty' (N. Sykes, 'Church and State in the Eighteenth Century', 1934, 105). He was concerned to make ordination a properly solemn ceremony and to ensure that no one unsuitable was admitted to orders. He fought against pluralism and non-residence; he exercised his own patronage with great care, and set his face against simony. Once his clergy were in post Sharp showed much concern about their problems and performance, as witness hundreds of surviving letters dispensing advice, encouragement, and patient reprimand. He was particularly concerned about the further education of the clergy and often made small grants from his own pocket for the purchase of books, typical of his many acts of generosity, which centred on the hospitality he provided at Bishopthorpe. He was a frequent weekday attender at his own cathedral and also set up and attended weekly sermons in York which were given by clergy from all over the diocese; the preacher was asked to dinner at Bishopthorpe afterwards and submitted to a tutorial from his archbishop. He found that the administration of confirmation in the diocese had been particularly neglected and set about redressing this, at the same time encouraging the bishops in the three other dioceses to follow his example. He was also concerned with the oversight of schools, taking pains over the appointment of schoolmasters, monitoring statutes, and giving sensible advice about the regime for pupils. 
Sharp envisaged a larger role for the rural deans than would have obtained in most dioceses. In 1705 he issued rules and orders for them. They were to have a supervisory function in their deaneries, granting matrimonial licenses, reporting vacancies and dilapidations, annually collecting and returning parish registers, and notifying the church courts of scandalous offenders who had escaped being presented. In many ways this would have added a local tier to diocesan administration. 
However, in the end it was the church courts which were responsible for enforcing discipline and good order in the diocese. They had not been reformed at the Restoration or again in 1689. Sharp had had a ringside view of this failure, which evidently continued to rankle with him. He believed that the Church of England was the best church in Christendom, but recognized its weakness in the field of discipline, 'which had never been effectually provided for' (Sharp, 'Life', 2.355). He had long been troubled about his own courts: he tried to stop the practice of commuting penances, and he issued instructions that the sentence of excommunication was to be delayed as long as possible. Matters came to a head in 1698 when serious accusations of malpractice were made against the deputy register of the exchequer (testamentary) court. This led Sharp to mount a visitation of his courts, probably the only one in the Church of England after the Restoration. He issued cautious articles of inquiry; only the close examination of the practice of deputy registers, who could also be busy proctors in other diocesan courts, revealed the fact that he was seeking the root of corruption. When they came in, the replies from the court officers -- from the chancellor, Henry Watkinson, downwards -- were vague and evasive. One thing they seem to show is the inbred conservatism of the courts. Sharp continued to have meetings with Watkinson and others until 1705, but in the end he had to admit defeat. It was no doubt this bruising experience which in 1710 led him to propose various reforms for the Canterbury convocation to consider, all to no avail. The decline of the courts in the period before the revolution, capped by the 'Toleration Act' legitimizing the practice of dissent, meant that the Church of England could no longer pretend to exercise spiritual discipline across the country. 
This was the context for the societies for the reformation of manners. Founded by a layman, these societies embraced churchmen and dissenters. Through lectures and by direct action against vice in the church and secular courts, the societies sought to roll back the tide, as they saw it, of vice. The movement was endorsed by both William and Mary and received the support of Tenison and most of the 'whig' bishops. Not so Sharp: 'he always disliked and discouraged... the Societies for the Reformation of Manners' (Sharp, 'Life', 1.170). He felt that the presence of dissenters in the meetings was in danger of turning them into illegal conventicles, and he disliked the element of witch-hunting in place of genuine reformation of character. When a society was established by Nottinghamshire clergy he moved at once to control it, insisting that it must be 'modest, prudent and inoffensive' in its work (ibid., 1.173). But he tolerated other societies in the diocese where they were composed only of churchmen. 
In 1702 William Nicolson became the bishop of Carlisle, and this led in time to the most difficult confrontation between the archbishop and one of his three suffragans that Sharp had to deal with. Nicolson had started life as a tory but at Carlisle became more of a whig. When the high-flying tory gadfly Francis Atterbury was appointed dean of Carlisle in 1704, the sparks were set to fly. Nicolson and Atterbury were old enemies, Nicolson having written against Atterbury's position on the powers of convocation. Nicolson now refused to institute Atterbury 'unless he first revoked certain propositions relating to the royal supremacy, which might seem to be deducible from his convocation book' (N. Sykes, 'Edmund Gibson', 1926, 58). Tenison backed Nicolson, but the tory bishops, including Sharp, by this time clearly on the tory side, were behind Atterbury. Nicolson continued to refuse to institute Atterbury, deducing from the Carlisle statutes that he had the same power over the dean (on institution) as over 'the meanest vicar in my diocese' (Glos. RO, L-B-S MSS, box 4, bundle V.1). Sharp, to save Nicolson's face, offered to institute Atterbury himself under commission from Nicolson. Nicolson refused and summoned Atterbury to Carlisle from Bishopthorpe to discuss the matter. Sharp now tried to get Sir Robert Harley to persuade Anne to intervene. When she did so Nicolson had to institute Atterbury. The vice-dean, Hugh Todd, had been Atterbury's supporter in Carlisle, and this led to further trouble for Sharp. Todd was in dispute with Nicolson and was not slow to involve Sharp over his bishop's head. By his patient intervention and eventual strictness with Todd, Sharp calmed the troubled waters. Meanwhile Atterbury had made himself obnoxious in Carlisle, and the chapter urged Nicolson to visit the cathedral. Atterbury retorted that, as Carlisle was a royal foundation at the Reformation, the bishop had no right of visitation. Tenison rightly saw that this was a matter of national importance, and when Nicolson introduced a bill to declare Henry VIII's statutes valid the whig bishops supported it. Sharp did not feel he could do so and there was a heated debate in the Lords in January 1708 which Nicolson won. On 28 March Nicolson, who was afraid Sharp had been seeing Todd, called on his archbishop: he 'received me very kindly desiring that our warmth in the House of Lords might be mutually forgotten' ('Diary', 19, 28). Thus, in a typical act of magnanimity, ended a struggle which must have caused Sharp much pain, and in which he had to admit defeat. 
Sharp was the only one of the seven churchmen recommended by Burnet to William for bishoprics who was consistently a high-churchman and usually on the side of the tories in parliament. But in the early years of William's reign he was able to work with his brother bishops. In 1694 he was appointed to a new commission to oversee church affairs, especially episcopal promotions. He was however moving away from his colleagues, typically when he refused to support William's desire for the attainder and execution of the Jacobite Sir John Fenwick. After this 'he virtually ceased lending his support to the ecclesiastical commission', though Tenison continued to send him the papers (Bennett, 'King William III and the episcopate', 127). With the accession of Anne everything changed. It was soon clear that Sharp was her favourite cleric. At her insistence, and despite illness, Sharp preached her coronation sermon, taking the classic text 'kings shall be thy nursing fathers and their queens thy nursing mothers' (J. Sharp, 'A Sermon Preach'd at the Coronation of Queen Anne', 1702, 1). Anne 'leaned upon the spiritual counsel and friendship of... Sharp and in his Caroline piety she found much comfort' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 113). From her side Anne expressed the relationship as that 'I should be her confessor and she would be mine' (Sharp, 'Life', 1.300). This hardly makes Sharp her 'confessor' in the technical sense, but he was certainly at her side as she prepared for the sacrament. Anne took her duties as head of the church very seriously and felt that the high-flyers' cry of 'the church in danger' was a personal insult. However, this sense of duty carried with it obligations for Sharp. She expected him and others not to vote against her interests in the Lords: 'she pressed me earnestly to be on her side on all matters that came before parliament relating to the prerogative... she desired that I would never promise my vote, till I had acquainted her with my objection... but if she could not satisfy me, then I should vote as I pleased. (ibid., 1.300)' This undertaking Sharp was glad to give. 
The most serious clash between Sharp and his queen came over the 'Act of Union'. Churchmen saw that the union between England and Scotland raised potential problems for the Church of England as the established church in England. In 1702 Tenison and Sharp were appointed to a commission to think this through, though in the event Sharp never attended. Tenison brought in a bill 'for the security of the Church of England' guaranteeing its traditional constitutional place (Carpenter, 393). Sharp felt the bill was not sufficient protection because the 'Act of Union' pronounced that 'Scottish religion is the true protestant religion and the presbyterian government is necessary', so that it 'cut off all the hopes of the episcopal clergy' (Sharp, 'Life', 1.393). Anne, who was set on the union, urged Sharp to drop his opposition, but he, with the tory bishops, refused. However, it passed. Sharp had also been concerned about individual episcopalian clergymen in Scotland and from 1704 was distressed to hear of actual persecution in Edinburgh and elsewhere. Accordingly he did his best to forward the cause of toleration in Scotland. The close alliance between Anne and Sharp was most clearly expressed in ecclesiastical appointments; for much of the time of their partnership they worked with Harley, the great parliamentary fixer, though Harley's position varied according to the ministerial permutations of the time. The candidates were mainly Sharp's, but on occasions Anne did not hesitate to exercise her prerogative. Sharp's appointments were mainly moderate high-churchmen. But the triumvirate did not have it all their own way, and Godolphin, the lord treasurer, often opposed them on behalf of the whigs, in 1705, for instance, getting William Wake to Lincoln against Sharp's candidate, Sir William Dawes. Matters came to a head in 1706 with the so-called 'bishoprics crisis'. Exeter and Chester were vacant, and Sharp had his candidates accepted. Godolphin was furious, and threatened that the whigs would withdraw from the ministry if Anne did not change her mind. Face was saved by a vacancy at Ely to which John Moore, a whig, was appointed. Lord Somers blamed these defeats on Tenison: 'the Archbishop is principally at fault, who does not speak plainly and fully to the Queen, when the Archbishop of York never suffers her to rest' (Bennett, 'Bishoprics crisis', 738). In the fluid politics of the time the episcopal vote in the Lords was important, and Godolphin lost patience, writing to Anne: 'what reflection will it not cause in the world that all these weighty things (of state) together cannot stand in the balance with the single point of whether Dr Blackall at this time be made a bishop, or a dean or a prebend. (Gregg, 249)' One earlier outcome of struggles between church and state had been the foundation of Queen Anne's Bounty in 1704. The original idea had been Burnet's, but the actual proposal had been Harley's, to regain favour with the clergy after the failure of the high-church 'Occasional Conformity Bill'. By it the crown was to surrender the proceeds of tenths and first-fruits on ecclesiastical appointments to create a fund to augment poor livings, something which would be dear to Sharp's heart: 'I find the Archbishop of York is highly transported with your notion about the firstfruits', wrote Godolphin to Harley (Longleat, miscellaneous vol., fol. 84). In due time Sharp, who had been involved in the plan since its inception, threw his weight behind the bill, against whig opposition, and for once carried all the bishops with him. 
A recurrent issue on which Sharp differed from his low-church brethren was that of occasional conformity. Sharp disliked the practice of occasional conformity, considering it dishonest when it was used to procure advancement in political life, though tolerable when it expressed Christian charity, as when Richard Baxter communicated at St Giles's. But in 1704 the tories attempted to steer their bill banning the practice through the Lords by tacking it to a finance bill after it had twice been defeated by the whig peers; Sharp felt this was a shabby manoeuvre and used all his influence to get it defeated in the Commons. The matter was again revived -- this time with his support -- in 1711 when the bill against occasional conformity was passed. 
All this time relations between Sharp and Tenison, who was painfully shy and suffering from gout, deteriorated steadily. Matters came openly to a head in 1712 over the question of lay baptism. High-flying clergy, including Henry Dodwell, had attacked the validity of baptism by a layman. Tenison informally gathered together some bishops, including Sharp, who issued a declaration that lay baptism was to be discouraged but was not invalid -- the classic 'Catholic' doctrine. Tenison then went further and drew up an instruction to the clergy that they should not rebaptize. This he sent to Sharp for approval. Sharp, with his high-church episcopal colleagues William Dawes of Chester, Offspring Blackall of Exeter, and Philip Bisse of St David's, demurred and replied to Tenison: 'I can by no means come into that proposal your grace has now made in your letter... for I am afraid that it would be too great an encouragement to the Dissenters to go on their way of irregular uncanonical baptisms. (Sharp, 'Life', 1.376)' Burnet says that Sharp was 'prevailed on to change his mind' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.605). But it was one thing for some bishops to assent to an informal declaration and another to take it forward to a formal instruction to all the clergy. The incident also demonstrates that towards the end of his life Sharp was hardening in his attitude to dissenters, though he disapproved of their being 'vilified' in Anglican pulpits (Sharp, 'Life', 1.357). 
Nevertheless Sharp did not fail to respond to appeals from foreign protestants distressed by the fortunes of war, such as the Vaudois clergy and those of the Palatinate. But his most regular foreign contacts were with the Lutherans in Prussia and Hanover. In 1711 he worked with George Smalridge, a friend and protege who later wrote his Latin epitaph in York Minster, to get the English liturgy used at the court of Hanover. But despite the potential importance of the move it came to nothing. In Prussia Daniel Ernst Jablonski hoped to introduce a translated English liturgy into the court chapel of Frederick I. He sought to interest Tenison in the plans, but for some reason Tenison failed to respond. Jablonski persisted and embarked on a lengthy correspondence with Sharp through the good offices of Smalridge. Sharp was always concerned to move the thinking forward from the use of the Anglican liturgy to questions of order, that is, episcopacy. This Jablonski espoused in a treatise on episcopacy in 1711. Despite correspondence the scheme ran into the sands in 1712. 
Sharp's last illness began in December 1713. A visit to Bath did nothing to revive him and he died there on 2 February 1714; his wife survived him. He was buried in his cathedral at York, in St Mary's Chapel, where he had been archbishop for twenty-two years. Sharp and his wife had fourteen children, seven of each sex, of whom only two sons and two daughters survived him. The elder son, John Sharp, became MP for Ripon and was a high-flying tory. The younger, Thomas Sharp, was ordained and became successively chaplain to Archbishop Dawes at York and archdeacon of Northumberland; he was his father's biographer, having access to his diaries which were subsequently lost. Sharp's chief recreation was as a numismatist. As such he was friendly with the York antiquary Ralph Thoresby, to whom he left his coin collection. Sharp was largely responsible for Thoresby's conversion from dissent. He was also very interested in his gardens at Bishopthorpe, where latterly he spent much time in prayer, calling them his 'Temple of Praise' (Sharp, 'Life', 2.65). Sharp was undoubtedly a man of deep personal piety. Besides his daily devotions he regularly dedicated 24 June, which he reckoned his spiritual birthday, to solemn prayer and self-examination. This custom went back to 1688 about which his diary reads: 'I began to apply myself more diligently to the work of religion and spent the summer well. And I thank God most heartily that I have never relapsed' (ibid., 2.65). These strenuous days of devotion (together with his birthday and new year's day) continued until 1713, when his health began to fail. 


@@@@@


doc= 25214


Sharpe, Leonell (bap. 1560, d. 1631), Church of England clergyman and author, the second son of Robert Sharpe, a successful member of the Mercers' Company of London, and Juliann Mallory, eldest daughter of Sir Richard Mallory, mercer and lord mayor of London, was baptized on 28 February 1560 at St Michael Bassishaw, London. Schooled at Eton College, he entered King's College, Cambridge, in August 1576 and graduated BA in 1581, MA in 1584, and DTh in 1597. He was a fellow of King's (1579-89) and was ordained deacon and priest in September 1587. At Cambridge, Sharpe met and cultivated Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, perhaps a distant relative by marriage, who was a student at Trinity College (1577-81). Sharpe later claimed that Essex introduced him to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, who sent him to plead with Archbishop Whitgift on behalf of the presbyterians Thomas Cartwright, Dudley Fenner, and Humphrey Fenn. Essex also later employed him to lobby Whitgift on behalf of other leading radicals. 
Sharpe was present with Leicester and Essex when Queen Elizabeth visited the army at Tilbury in August 1588 -- he was employed to read out to the troops information about Spanish plans for crushing protestantism in England, and then to repeat the queen's speech to the army, of which he thus obtained the only copy. Despite his apparent lack of stature (he was often called 'Little Dr Sharpe'), both tasks attest his skill as an orator. He became a chaplain of Essex no later than 1589, when he attended the earl on the Portugal expedition. He subsequently accompanied him abroad to Normandy in 1591 and Cadiz in 1596. 
In April 1590 Sharpe was presented by the crown, presumably at Essex's behest, to the rectory of Malpas in Cheshire, but probably spent little time in this strongly recusant parish, since he served Essex as both household chaplain (he baptized the earl's son Henry in April 1595) and man of business in academic matters relating to Cambridge. He helped John Coke to leave Cambridge and enter service with Essex's friend Fulke Greville ('c'.1590), conveyed a message from Essex to the bishop of Winchester about the disposition of William Whitaker's fellowship at Eton in December 1595, and acted as a liaison between Cambridge and Essex after the earl became chancellor of the university in August 1598. An eighteenth-century chronicler of King's College claimed that Sharpe showed himself 'too obsequious' to Essex, 'in prejudice to our revenue' (Allen, 2.931). Essex repaid such service by arranging for Sharpe to preach Lenten sermons at court in 1595, 1596, and 1598, and by urging Cambridge to allow him to proceed DTh without performing the usual exercises. This request failed, but Whitgift helped to secure Sharpe's doctorate in April 1597. In the same year, having presumably resigned Malpas, Sharpe was presented to the livings of Tiverton (Pitt portion) and Stokinteignhead in Devon. Difficulties with the latter presentation apparently prevented Sharpe from accompanying the earl on the Azores expedition that summer. 
In 1602 Sharpe was listed as a supernumerary chaplain to the queen, an appointment that probably dates from 1598 or early 1599, before Essex lost influence over such promotions. Despite his entry into royal service, Sharpe was summoned to attend Essex on his sickbed in December 1599. His involvement (if any) in Essex's rising of February 1601 is unclear, but Sir Robert Cecil ordered him not to leave his Devon parishes for a period. He responded by seeking to distance himself from Essex's actions and cultivating Cecil's support. By April 1601 he had married Anne ('b'. 1578), second daughter of John Chichester of Hall, Devon. Sharpe was back at Cambridge in March 1603, where he preached a sermon praising the accession of James I. Along with a similarly laudatory tract, 'Dialogus inter Angliam et Scotiam', it was speedily published by the university printer. 
These efforts to curry favour with the new regime proved successful. Sharpe was appointed a royal chaplain by 1604, regularly attending princes Henry and Charles, but found himself in trouble in June that year, when he was sent to the Tower for privately organizing various gentlemen to defend the king against an alleged conspiracy which might have involved bloodshed between English and Scots. Coming at a time when James's efforts to create a formal union of England and Scotland were facing strong opposition in parliament, this action was regarded as extremely provocative, but Sharpe's profuse claims of loyalty to the king and pleas to Cecil soon secured his release. He was appointed a chaplain to Prince Henry by the end of 1605 and archdeacon of Berkshire in November 1605. 
By the time of Cecil's death in 1612 Sharpe had pinned his hopes of advancement on Prince Henry and Henry Howard, earl of Northampton. In that year Henry (energetically) and Northampton (with little enthusiasm) tried unsuccessfully to secure Sharpe's appointment as provost of King's. It is probably no coincidence that this year also witnessed Sharpe's return to print, this time as a writer of violently anti-papal tracts: his 'Novum fidei symbolum' included a polemic later translated (by his older brother, Edward) as 'A looking-glasse for the pope, wherein he may see his owne face, the expresse image of Antichrist' (1616). The king declined to receive the dedication to this work; another tract of about this period, on salvation and the gospel, remained unprinted. In November 1612 his hopes were even more severely dented by the death of Prince Henry, for whom Sharpe published a funeral sermon which included verses by his brothers Andrew, William, and Edward. Rumours in late 1613 that Sharpe would be appointed bishop of Rochester (presumably by the efforts of his patron, Northampton) came to nothing. 
In June 1614 Sharpe and Sir Charles Cornwallis were interrogated by the privy council and sent to the Tower for inciting John Hoskyns to deliver an incendiary speech in parliament that threatened an English version of the 'Sicilian vespers' if Scottish courtiers were not expelled from court. Northampton's death a few days later left them fully exposed to the king's anger. It emerged that Sharpe had chosen Hoskyns to give the speech and had suggested the reference to the massacre of foreigners in thirteenth-century Sicily, while Cornwallis had allegedly paid Hoskyns for undertaking the task. They were held in the Tower for a full year and Sharpe was subsequently banished to his Devon parishes until the following spring. He sought to regain royal favour by publishing an English version of his 'Looking-Glasse' in 1616 and by allegedly ghost-writing Sir Lewis Stukeley's defence of his actions against Sir Walter Ralegh in 1618. By the 1620s, like Hoskyns, Sharpe had attached himself to George Villiers, from May 1623 duke of Buckingham. He sent advice to the duke about policies during the reign of Elizabeth and sermonized in defence of Buckingham's reputation after the defeat at the Ile de Re. 
Buckingham's assassination in August 1628 removed the fifth and final major patron of Sharpe's career. Despite his apparently excellent Calvinist credentials as a chaplain to both Essex and Prince Henry, Sharpe adopted an increasingly anti-puritan tone by the 1610s. Towards the end of his life he even refused to pay his visitation fees to the new bishop of Exeter, the Calvinist Joseph Hall. Sharpe apparently spent Christmas 1629 with Sir Henry Wotton, provost of Eton and formerly Essex's secretary. He died on 1 January 1631 at Wotton's family home at Boughton Malherb, Kent, and was buried in the church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 25215


Sharp, Michael William (1776/7-1840), portrait and subject painter, was born in the parish of St Paul's, Covent Garden, London, the son of Michael Sharp (1750/51-1800), a principal oboe player at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, and music master, and his wife, an actress. He was almost certainly the Michael William Sharp who was baptized on 9 May 1779 at St Paul's, Covent Garden, the son of Michael Sharp and Elizabeth. The family moved to Norwich about 1783 or 1784. Sharp originally studied music with his father, but showed a talent for painting and may have taken lessons from the Norwich school artist, John Crome. At the age of twenty he went to London where he entered the Royal Academy Schools on 21 October 1797. By 1799 he was studying with William Beechey, whom he accompanied to Windsor Castle when Beechey was commissioned to paint portraits of the royal family. Here Sharp came to the attention of George III, who is reported to have requested many of the nobility to sit to Sharp, and 'The consequence was that Mr Sharp is said in a few days to have orders for 140 Pictures of Persons of the Highest Rank' ('Norwich Mercury', 1 May 1802). These included members of the royal family. 
Sharp first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1801 from a London address, and continued to exhibit there until 1836. He appears to have married by 1805 when he exhibited a portrait entitled 'Mrs Sharp' at the Royal Academy. He also exhibited from 1806 to 1830 with the British Institution, gaining the premium in the familiar life class for his painting 'The Music-Master' in 1809. In 1808 he joined the Society for the Study of Epic and Pastoral Design (formerly the Sketching Society), whose members included the brothers John James Chalon and Alfred Edward Chalon, Francis Stevens, and Cornelius Varley. He remained with the society for a year. Sharp retained his links with Norwich and with Crome, and in 1813 he exhibited for the first time with the Norwich Society of Artists. In the same year he probably painted the portraits in Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery of Crome and his wife, Phoebe (exh. 1814; Norwich Society of Artists), whose youngest son ('b'. 1813) was named after him. Sharp continued to exhibit with the Norwich Society until 1821, becoming vice-president in 1816 and president in 1817, the year of his wife's death. During his visits to Norwich he stayed at Crome's home and rented a studio at the Assembly House, where he carried out commissions for portraits. 
Probably because of his family background, many of Sharp's paintings have theatrical or musical themes and include portraits of performers. An example is his exhibit with the Royal Academy in 1823, 'Shakespeare's jubilee, with portraits of the performers of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, Covent Garden', 'with the exception of Mr Macready, who declined sitting' ('Norwich Mercury', 24 May 1823). The subject paintings and portraits, usually painted on a small scale, often have humorous overtones. When he signed his work he used initials, MWS, or M. W. Sharp. His paintings were very popular in his day and he found a ready market for them. Many were engraved, including 'Sunday Morning' (engraved by Charles Heath in 1820) and his portrait of the duke of Wellington (engraved in mezzotint by William Say in 1828). In 1820 he delivered a lecture to the Philosophical Society of Norwich which was published as 'An essay on gesture' in James Elmes's 'Annals of the Fine Arts', volumes 4 and 5. He exhibited with the Society of British Artists in 1825 and 1826. Little is known of his last years. He died in France at Boulogne in 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 25216


Sharp, Patrick (d. 1615), theologian, was apparently related to the Sharps of Houstoun. He is first recorded in 1574, when he was made master of Glasgow grammar school. His previous education is unknown, but he may have been qualified in theology already. While in this position he was brought into frequent contact with Andrew Melville, to whom he subsequently acknowledged himself greatly indebted. Soon after 1575 he was appointed one of a commission of classical scholars to draw up a new Latin grammar for use in the Scottish schools. He demitted the schoolmastership in November 1582 and became a university regent, being recorded as minister of Paisley in 1584. In 1585 James VI appointed him principal of the University of Glasgow, and many French protestant refugees studied divinity under him, as well as the future principal John Cameron. 
From this time Sharp took an important part in the affairs of the Scottish church. He seems to have wished to preserve a position of neutrality between the two parties dividing the kirk, but gradually inclined to the king's side. In 1586 he was placed on a commission charged by the general assembly to control the proceedings of the bishops and in 1596 the general assembly appointed him and fifteen others to organize the church in opposition to the government. As a result the privy council ordered him to return to Glasgow. But in the following year he took part in the general assembly at Perth at which the king recovered the initiative, and subsequently joined the commission to whom were delegated the powers of the general assembly when that body was not in session, and whose appointment paved the way for the re-establishment of bishops. About 1602 he supervised some university reforms and assured its autonomy relative to the town. In 1606 Sharp was summoned to Hampton Court, with seven other divines, to support the king's side in a debate with Andrew Melville and seven ultra-presbyterians on the general questions at issue between king and kirk. That year he was also appointed constant moderator to the Glasgow presbytery in the absence of the bishop, and met so much opposition that the privy council had to order the presbytery to receive him or face the penalties of rebellion. Yet in the following year he was rebuked for endeavouring to extend the jurisdiction of the presbytery to cover criminal cases. In June 1608 Sharp took part in the Falkland Conference, which was intended to make matters easy for the bishops at the next general assembly. He was appointed to the newly instituted Scottish high commission on 15 May 1610 and continued to serve until 11 August 1614. In December 1613 a royal visitation of the university was set up in response to 'enormiteis'. Sharp's theology may have seemed old-fashioned, and an up-to-date replacement was available in Robert Boyd. Sharp anticipated deposition by resigning his principalship. Among his achievements had been the recovery of the university's medieval silver mace, removed at the Reformation by the principal of the time. 
Sharp died in May 1615 in Glasgow, leaving an estate valued at $1362 Scots. He was three times married. He and his first wife, Agnes Cairns (died in or before 1593), had two sons, David and James. On 1 September 1593 he married Mary Fowlis, widow of John Haldane of Balwill, with whom he had one son, Christian, and two daughters. His third wife, whom he married some time after 1600, was Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Jack of Eastwood and widow of Walter Maxwell of Pollok. Sharp was a distinguished scholar, but only one of his works survives, 'Doctrinae Christianae brevis explicatio', printed by Robert Waldegrave at Edinburgh in 1599. A work of exegesis, it is simplified on Ramist lines (it speaks of the 'use of doctrine'), quotes 'aphorisms' as memory aids, transliterates its Greek and Hebrew citations, and cites some of the fathers. 


@@@@@


doc= 25217


Sharp, Richard (1759-1835), politician and wit, was born in the garrison of St John's, Newfoundland, the elder son of Richard Sharp (1737-1765), a British army officer, and Elizabeth Adams (1739-1799), a citizen of St John's. He was related to the Sharps of Romsey, Hampshire, a well-known family of successful merchants. The family returned to London from Newfoundland in the early 1760s, and as a member of a staunchly nonconformist family the young Sharp was educated by the classical scholar the Revd Dr John Fell, Independent minister for Thaxted, Essex. Having been 'bred to trade from infancy' (Wilson, 133), Sharp successfully completed his apprenticeship before taking over the hatter's business which had been started by his grandfather on Fish Street Hill, London. In recent times Sharp has been credited with having been 'the world's first truly famous hatter' (McDowell, 'Hats: Status, Style and Glamour', 1992, 54). About 1798 his business interests moved to 17 Mark Lane where, as a partner in the West India firm of Boddington, Philips, Sharp & Co., he prospered to become one of London's most prominent merchants. He subsequently lived briefly at Mansion House Place before purchasing in 1808 23 Park Lane, where portraits by Reynolds -- of Burke, Johnson, and of Reynolds himself -- adorned his drawing-room. 
At both Park Lane and his much loved country retreat at Fredley Farm in Mickleham, Surrey, Sharp received and entertained many of the most able and cultured minds of the day, including Babbage, Faraday, Walter Scott, Grattan, Brougham, Horner, Romilly, John Russell, Chantrey, Porson, Hallam, Macaulay, Rogers, and Horne Tooke. Sydney Smith was such a frequent visitor to Fredley that he was nicknamed the Bishop of Mickleham and following the French Revolution other visitors included Talleyrand, D'Arblay, and Mme de Stael. According to Clayden, Sharp was possibly the most popular person in London society during this period, his gifted eloquence and kindly good nature making him 'universally welcome' (Clayden, 'The Early Life of Samuel Rogers', 280). Such tributes to Sharp's personal qualities were widespread: Sir James Mackintosh the respected lawyer, historian, and metaphysician, described Sharp as the best critic that he had ever known and someone who had 'produced more effect on my character than any other man' (Hills, 43). Macaulay was impressed that Sharp never gossiped or spoke badly of anyone: 'if he can say nothing good of a man he holds his tongue' (ibid., 66). Among the poets, Samuel Rogers, who was later offered the laureateship, owed much to his close and lifelong friendship with Sharp, and others who benefited from his advice and beneficence included Wordsworth, Coleridge, Hazlitt, and Sheridan. The extraordinary social impact which Sharp made during his lifetime is summarized by Kegan Paul who wrote that 'both in Parliament and in Society he had a power quite out of proportion to that which most other persons in his seeming position would have wielded' (Paul, 12). 
Sharp was a frequent and welcome guest at Holland House ['see also 'Holland House set] and he belonged to many London clubs including Brooks's, Eumelean, the Unincreasable, Clifford Street, and the exclusive King of Clubs of which -- with Mackintosh, Robert (Bobus) Smith, Rogers, Scarlett, and Allen -- he had been a founder member. Sharp was elected FSA on 19 April 1787. In 1806 he was one of the first members of the Literary Society and on 12 June that year he was elected FRS. He played a leading role in establishing the London Institution for the Improvement of Science and Literature and, having joined the Fishmongers' Company at the age of twenty-one, he was elected their prime warden for the years 1810-12. 
Politically Sharp represented the pocket borough of Castle Rising, Norfolk, in 1806-12 as a staunch whig and one of very few dissenters to be returned and he was appointed to the finance committee of the House of Commons because of his experience in banking and commerce. In this position, and later as a member of Horner's bullion committee, he met with success and he was complimented by Henry Bankes for his contribution to the house. In 1808 Sharp made his Copenhagen speech, fiercely criticizing the government for the unprovoked attack on the Danish fleet. Although this was received with the 'utmost applause and favour' (Clayden, 'Rogers and his Contemporaries', 1.44) Sharp thereafter preferred, much to the disappointment of his friends, to exert his influence less overtly. At the by-election of 1816 he was returned for the Irish constituency of Portarlington which he retained at the general election of 1818 but from which he resigned in 1819 in order to make way for his friend David Ricardo. 
As a dissenting whig Sharp pressed hard for greater civil and religious liberties. He served as a 'deputy' among London's dissenters and in 1790 wrote his stirring keynote letter to the public meeting of the friends to the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. Sharp was a member of the Society for Constitutional Information and in 1791-2 he, Rogers, and others initiated the Friends of the People group which agitated for political reform. In the cause of greater personal freedom Sharp stressed the importance of education, holding strong views on the subject of the English language. He wrote the preface to Fell's 'Grammar' (1784), addressed the Manchester Society on 'The nature and utility of eloquence' (1787), and advocated -- in reaction to 'Johnsonism' -- the common use of a purer, less pedantic form of English language which might owe less to Latin and other languages. His wit, wisdom, and interesting views on many subjects are contained in 'Letters and Essays in Poetry and Prose', published anonymously and to wide acclaim in 1834. This was his only significant publication although he corresponded with his friend John Adams, the future president of the United States, about writing an account of the establishment of American independence. 
Sharp did not marry and for the earlier part of his life, following his father's premature death, he remained at Fish Street Hill with his grandfather, mother, brother, stepfather (Thomas Cable Davis), and a number of stepsiblings. Later, about 1813, Maria Kinnaird became the much loved ward and adopted daughter of Richard and his brother William, and they, with William's wife Anna, lived together at their Park Lane address. When Richard Sharp died Maria inherited the bulk of his $250,000 estate and she married Thomas Drummond shortly afterwards. 
Throughout his life but increasingly from 1815 onwards Sharp delighted in travel, particularly in France, Switzerland, Italy, Scotland, and the Lake District, and became such an expert on itineraries that many were grateful for his advice. According to Wordsworth, Sharp knew Italy better than anyone he had ever met (Knight, 3.250-51). For much of his life Sharp suffered from a bad chest and a persistent 'winter cough' so his trips were partly motivated by concern for his health and from about 1832, when his condition worsened, increasing periods of time were spent at his house on Higher Terrace, Torquay. He died at Dorchester, Dorset, on 30 March 1835 at the age of seventy-six while returning to London from Torquay and he was buried on 4 April alongside other members of his family in the dissenters' burial-ground of Bunhill Fields, London. Sharp was an accomplished businessman, politician, philosopher, and author but he achieved distinction as Conversation Sharp, a highly acclaimed critic and popular conversationalist, whose opinions and advice on a wide range of issues were sought by many of the cleverest people of his day. He is believed to have been the inspiration for Dickens's Conversation Kenge in 'Bleak House'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25218


Sharp, Samuel (bap. 1709, d. 1778), surgeon, son of Henry Sharp, brazier, and his wife, Hannah 'nee' Puller of London, was baptized at St Peter's, Cornhill, London, on 17 June 1709. The fortunate apprentice of William Cheselden, senior surgeon at St Thomas's Hospital, he was indentured in 1724 for a fee of $300 paid by Elizabeth Sale, a widowed aunt living at Hertford. Her father, Sharp's maternal grandfather, was Isaac Puller MP, a former mayor of Hertford. Nothing is known of Sharp's early schooling. During his apprenticeship he met S.-F. Morand, a French surgeon dispatched to study Cheselden's lithotomy technique, and in 1729 or 1730 he became Morand's pupil in Paris. In 1732 he obtained the diploma of the Barber-Surgeons' Company and in 1733 he was elected surgeon to Guy's Hospital. In the same year Cheselden published his monumental 'Osteographia, or, The Anatomy of the Bones', towards which Sharp assisted; a vignette on the title-page shows Cheselden drawing with two apprentices said to be John Belchier and Sharp; no other certain likeness is known. Sharp rapidly acquired an extensive practice, and in 1739 published 'A Treatise on the Operations of Surgery', illustrated with fourteen plates of instruments; it was the first monograph in English on the subject and achieved eleven editions, and translations into French, Portuguese, Dutch, Spanish, and Italian. In July 1740 Sharp married Eleanor Baynes of Hatton Garden, daughter of Richard Baynes, alderman of York; they had three daughters and a son who took the name Samuel Sharpe Pocklington on marriage. 
In 1746 Sharp relinquished to William Hunter the 'course of anatomical lectures, to which were added the operations of surgery, with the application of bandages', delivered in Covent Garden on winter afternoons to naval surgeons. In 1749 Sharp became a fellow of the Royal Society of London and on a second visit to Paris was elected a foreign member of the Royal Academy of Surgery. Two papers in 'Philosophical Transactions' concerned cataract extraction and in 1751 he couched the composer G. F. Handel, being as unsuccessful as two later practitioners. In 1750 he published 'A Critical Enquiry into the Present State of Surgery', which achieved four editions, and translations into French, Dutch, Spanish, German, and Italian. This influential work focused on controversial surgical issues including hernia, cerebral concussion, lithotomy, tonsillectomy, and amputation. 
Sharp resigned from Guy's Hospital in 1757 on the grounds of ill health, probably asthma, but he continued in private practice until 1765, when he set out on a winter tour through Italy. The results were published in his forthright 'Letters from Italy', of 1766; these included an account of a visit to Geneva to see Voltaire again, Sharp having met him previously in London and Paris. Of his letters, Dr Johnson thought 'there was a great deal of matter in them' (Boswell, 'Life', 755). The publication of a second edition in 1767 produced Giuseppe Baretti's 'Account of the Manners and Customs of Italy', an acrid criticism of Sharp's views. It was answered by Sharp in 'A view of the customs, manners, drama, &c., of Italy, as they are described in the 'Frusta litteraria'', of Baretti in which, happily for Sharp, were recorded similar censures to the 'Letters from Italy'. 
Sharp proved an innovative surgical practitioner and communicator as the many editions of his books in seven European languages indicate. Nineteenth-century surgeons admired his forthrightness and skills. Louis Begin, a French practitioner, assessed Sharp in 1825 as 'one of those surgeons whose works show in the highest degree the impress of an observing mind, hostile to all authority and routine. There are few diseases on which he did not put forward new ideas, few operations whose instruments or procedures he did not improve. His writings contain many things in few pages, and we find in them both an originality and an independence of thought which charm the reader and always secure his attention. (Kirkup, 1)' James Paget said he 'was a thoroughly informed surgeon, well read, observant, judicious, a lover of simplicity, wisely doubtful. I think, too, he must have been an eminently safe man, who might be relied on for knowing or doing whatever, in his time, could be known or done for the good of his patients. (Paget, 53)' In England Sharp was the immediate link between Cheselden and both Percivall Pott and John Hunter. Sharp cultivated anatomical and operative precision, introducing numerous improvements in techniques and instruments. In place of the usual chair for amputation, he advised a table and specified the table's height, both for this and for herniotomy and lithotomy. He promoted the cylindrical, as opposed to the conical, cranial trephine saw and modified its controlling handle; he designed a cataract knife and made cogent observations on the manufacture of scalpels and suture needles. Indeed, in the reconstruction of surgical perceptions of this period, Samuel Sharp's contributions remain unique and invaluable sources. 
In 1766 Sharp retired to Bath, where he died at his home in the Circus on 24 March 1778 after a lingering illness; he was buried in Bath Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 25219


Sharp, Samuel (1814-1882), geologist and antiquary, was born on 18 July 1814 at Romsey, Hampshire, the son of Stephen Sharp ('bap'. 1791) and his wife, Anna Maria Bloor ('bap'. 1784), formerly of Uppingham. His father died while he was a child and his mother married the proprietor and editor of the 'Stamford Mercury'. Samuel, after schooling at Southsea, moved to Stamford, where he assisted in managing and editing the newspaper. He had an early interest in astronomy and chemistry but took up geology after attending a lecture at Stamford by George Fleming Richardson (1796-1848) in 1842. Together with John Morris (1810-1866), Sharp studied the geology of the local area, making use of sections newly exposed by railway construction. 
In 1846 Sharp married Caroline Ann Weldon and in 1857 they moved to Dallington Hall, near Northampton, where Caroline Sharp soon opened a new girls' boarding-school. Here Sharp's geological collecting continued, aided by the superintendent at the extensive open-cast Ironstone mine at Duston. As might be expected from someone connected with a school, Sharp gave constant assistance to naturalists of the younger generation in Northamptonshire. He also 'laboured energetically to found a good provincial museum' in Northampton, placing there from 1869, 'valuable contributions from his own large geological and antiquarian collections' (Judd 1883, 72). Over 1500 of his fossils were purchased by the British Museum in 1876; they included examples of a number of fossil species named after him. The residue of his collection went to Mason College, Birmingham. Sharp was fellow of the Geological Society from 1862 and published important papers on the oolites of Northamptonshire in 1870 and 1873, and on an uninformed search for coal near Northampton in 1871. His text book 'Rudiments of Geology' followed in 1875 (2nd edn, 1876). 
Sharp was also active as an antiquary. Long a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, Sharp published papers on architecture and local history, as well as one against cruelty to animals. A member of the Numismatic Society, Sharp also formed an unrivalled collection of the productions of the Stamford mint, on which he published in 1869 and 1880. He died on 28 January 1882 at his home, Great Harrowden Hall, near Wellingborough. The fossil brachiopod 'Kallirhynchia sharpi', named after him in 1938, now marks the long-distance Jurassic way footpath through both his adopted counties. 


@@@@@


doc= 25220


Sharp, Thomas (1693-1758), Church of England clergyman and theological writer, was born on 12 December 1693, the younger son of John Sharp (1645?-1714), archbishop of York, and his wife, Elizabeth Palmer ('fl'. 1660-1715), of Winthorpe in Lincolnshire. He was educated at first privately, by a Mr Ellis, then at Leeds grammar school, and later at St Paul's School, London. Admitted at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 25 April 1709, where he was tutored by Nicholas Clagett, college librarian, he became a Jermyn scholar in the following year. A commonplace book survives from his period as an undergraduate detailing his reading in theology, trigonometry, optics, and hydrostatics. He graduated BA in 1713 as a wrangler, was elected to a fellowship in 1715, and proceeded MA in 1716. He was ordained deacon in the diocese of London on 16 June 1716 and priested at York in February 1718. He became chaplain to Archbishop Dawes, prebendary of Southwell in Nottinghamshire, and a member of the Gentlemen's Society at Spalding. He was installed as prebendary of Wistow in the diocese of York on 8 May 1719, an office he held until his death in 1758. He was presented to the living of Ormsby, Yorkshire, in 1719, then on 27 February 1723 to the living of Rothbury in Northumberland, the second most valuable in the county. At the same time he was appointed archdeacon of Northumberland. He was created DD at Cambridge in 1729. On 1 December 1732 he was installed in the tenth prebend of Durham Cathedral, in 1755 succeeding Dr Mangey as official to the dean and chapter there. Although this excessive plurality must have been lucrative for Sharp, he appears to have been a conscientious and tireless pastor, as well as an efficient ecclesiastical administrator. 
Sharp married Judith (died 1757), daughter of Sir George Wheler (1651-1723), traveller, and Grace Higgons, on 19 June 1722 at Houghton-le-Spring, co. Durham; between 1723 and 1738, they had fourteen children, to whom he remained devoted throughout his life. He engaged in a voluminous correspondence with many of them. Much of his wealth was spent on the education of his two eldest sons, John Sharp and Thomas, both of whom followed him to Trinity College, Cambridge. John became, like his father, prebendary of Durham, and Thomas, fellow of Trinity, became curate at Bamburgh. Of his other children, Granville Sharp became a noted abolitionist, and William surgeon to George III. The Sharp family remained closely knit, bound together partly by religion, partly by a love of music. Many of his children were depicted playing music together on the family barge on the Thames by Zoffany in his painting 'The Sharp Family', now in the National Portrait Gallery. 
Sharp was a considerable book collector and owned a large library, in part inherited from his father. It was divided between his homes at Rothbury and Durham, and contained a substantial collection of early book auction catalogues. His books eventually became part of the library of Bamburgh Castle, one of Lord Crewe's charities, and are now on deposit in Durham University Library. Sharp was, like his sons, closely associated with the Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy, his first publication being a printed edition of a sermon he delivered to the corporation in York in 1721, 'A Charity-Sermon for the Relief of Poor Widows and Children of Clergymen' (1721). Many of the sermons he preached in Durham, Newcastle, York, Cambridge, and London were printed, together with a number of theological works. The first and most frequently reprinted of these was 'The Necessary Knowledge of the Lord's Supper' (1727), reprinted six times in the eighteenth century alone. He regularly engaged in theological controversy; his 'Enquiry about the Lawfulness of Eating Blood' (1733) was quickly followed by a 'Defence of the Enquiry about the Lawfulness of Eating Blood' (1734), and he published a 'Reply to a Pamphlet Entitled, 'The Protestant Flair'' (1735). His 'Two dissertations concerning the etymology and scripture-meaning of the Hebrew words Elohim and Berith' (1751) was written with the advice of Thomas Birch, who also saw it through the press for him. Sharp was forced to publish 'A review and defence of two dissertations concerning the etymology and scripture-meaning of the Hebrew words Elohim and Berith' in 1754 and 1755. A related work, 'Discourses Touching the Antiquity of the Hebrew Tongue and Character', was published in 1755. His lengthy correspondence with Catherine Cockburn on moral virtue and moral obligation, published in volume 2 of Cockburn's 'Works' (1751), survives in manuscript. It was recommended by Richard Price in the first edition (1758) of his influential 'Review of the Principal Questions and Difficulties in Morals'. Sharp's 'Collected Works' were published in six volumes in 1763. He died at Durham on 16 March 1758 and on 23 March was buried in the galilee chapel in Durham Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 25221


Sharp, Thomas (1770-1841), antiquary, only son of Thomas Sharp of Coventry, hatter, was born on 7 November 1770, in a house in Smithford Street, Coventry, which bore the effigy of 'Peeping Tom'. He was educated at the free grammar school in Coventry and on his father's death, in 1784, he joined the family business. He married, in 1804, Charlotte Turland of Barnwell, Cambridgeshire; they had nine children, of whom seven survived him. 
From youth Sharp devoted himself to the study of local antiquities and the Coventry city muniments. About 1798 Sharp, with two friends, George Howlette and George Nickson, commissioned views of all the buildings of interest in the county, to be engraved and inserted in their copies of William Dugdale's 'Warwickshire'. In 1820 Sharp procured rubbings of all the brasses in the county for insertion in the same work. In 1804 he retired from the retail trade to become a wholesaler, and devoted his additional leisure to antiquarian research, producing many pamphlets and articles, and in 1824 a 'Guide to Coventry'. His chief work, 'A dissertation on the pageants, or dramatic mysteries, anciently performed at Coventry by the trading companies of that city', was published at Coventry in a small edition in 1825. It was praised by Sir Walter Scott for its 'carefulness and extent of research' ('Letters', 9.444). It remains indispensable, especially because of the loss by enemy action in 1940 of the guild records which Sharp -- here anticipating the course of later research -- had used to provide the plays with a context. He was in error in believing 'Ludus Coventriae' to be a genuine Coventry play; it is now regarded by scholars as an 'N-Town play'. Sharp proposed to publish an edition of 125 copies of the Coventry 'Corpus Christi plays', but failed to secure sufficient signatures. (The compilation was published by the Shakespeare Society in 1841.) 
In 1834 Sharp relinquished his declining business altogether and moved to Leamington, where he continued his frequent communication with fellow antiquaries such as Sir Francis Palgrave, Dawson Turner, Francis Douce, William Salt, and John Britton. In 1831 he acted as executor of William Hamper, whose friend and correspondent he had been. Always active in promoting municipal welfare, in 1837 Sharp took a principal part in founding the Coventry and Warwick Hospital. He died on 12 August 1841 at Leamington and was interred at St Michael's burial-ground, Coventry. 
At the time of his death Sharp was engaged on a history of Coventry, which appeared posthumously and incomplete as 'A Concise History of Coventry'. His 'Illustrative Papers on the History and Antiquities of the City of Coventry' was published in 1871, with a memoir by William George Fretton. 
Apart from his topographical collections relating to Warwickshire (the majority of which, like the extra-illustrated Dugdale, were purchased in 1834 by William Staunton of Longbridge House, near Warwick), Sharp was an assiduous collector of coins, and he was an authority on provincial coins and tokens. In 1834 he published a detailed catalogue of the Chetwynd collection at Grendon Hall. One of Sharp's own coins, a gold half-florin of Edward III, of which only two specimens were known, is now in the British Museum. Part of Sharp's library was sold in London by Sotheby and Wilkinson on 23 July 1858. The bulk of his collections of Warwickshire manuscripts was destroyed in a fire at the Birmingham Free Reference Library in 1879, but an annotated copy of his 'Dissertation on the Dramatic Mysteries' and a volume of his Coventry tracts, also annotated, survive in the British Library (Add. MSS 43645 and 44932). 


@@@@@


doc= 25222


Sharp, William (1749-1824), engraver, was born on 29 January 1749 at Haydon Yard, Minories, London, the address of his father, a gunmaker. Having been apprenticed to Barak Longmate, a bright engraver skilled in heraldry, he later claimed that his first engravings were made upon a publican's pewter pot, but from 1771 he extended his experience as a pupil in the Royal Academy Schools. He commenced his career as a writing engraver in Bartholomew Lane, and gave his first demonstration of greater powers in 1775 with a small quarto engraving, 'Hector', of an old lion in the Tower of London. Plates for the 'Novelist's Magazine' after designs by Stothard revealed his skills to a wider audience, and by 1782 he had moved to Vauxhall, where he worked on more substantial plates. The engraving 'Alfred the Great Dividing his Loaf with the Pilgrim', after Benjamin West and published by Boydell in 1782, made his reputation. After inheriting a legacy from a brother who had died at Gibraltar, Sharp moved from Vauxhall to a house in Charles Street, near the Middlesex Hospital, and later, successively, to Titchfield Street, to Acton, and to Chiswick. 
Sharp was soon recognized as a very important contributor to the revival of the classical style of line engraving in England, following Sir Robert Strange and William Woollett, and in 1789 he completed the engraving 'King Charles II Landing at Dover', after West, a work that Woollett had left unfinished at his death in 1785. In the twentieth century he was still seen as: 'one of the most accomplished of all the reproductive line-engravers of the eighteenth century... in his portraits, in particular, he showed a wonderful power of interpreting his originals... 'Richard Hart Davis', 'John Hunter', 'Porson' (1810) and 'Dr Raine' (1815) exhibit a command of gradations of tone seldom seen outside mezzotint. (Hind, 205)' Sharp's contemporaries considered his best engravings to be 'The Doctors of the Church', after Guido; 'John Hunter', after Reynolds, and 'King Lear in the Storm', after West. He was also noted for two large plates of scenes from the siege and relief of Gibraltar (1781): 'The Sortie', after Trumbull, published in 1799, and 'The Destruction of the Floating Battery', after Copley, published with a keyplate in 1810, and for his involvement with the most prestigious serial publications of the time. He engraved three plates for Macklin's series of 'Bible' illustrations, including 'The Holy Family' after Reynolds (1792), for which Macklin had paid Reynolds 500 guineas; three plates for Robert Bowyer's series of illustrations to Hume's 'History of England', and three more, including 'King Lear in the Storm', for John Boydell's 'Shakspeare Gallery' (1791-1802). 
Despite his fame and reputation Sharp regarded the established structure of artistic patronage with suspicion. Like Strange and Woollett before him, he refused to accept membership of the Royal Academy on the inferior associate basis offered to engravers: this decision is said to have alienated him from the president, Sir Joshua Reynolds. However, he accepted honorary membership of the Imperial Academy of Vienna and of the Royal Academy of Munich. His political sympathies were with those who criticized the established order and with the revolutionary forces in America and France. The theme of liberty was celebrated in two of his earliest historical engravings, 'Boadicea Haranguing the Britons' and 'The Declaration of Rights', both after Thomas Stothard; the second print, engraved in 1782, was dedicated to the Society for Constitutional Information, of which Sharp was a member. He engraved and published fine portraits of Thomas Paine, the author of 'The Rights of Man', after Romney in 1793, and of the populist reformer Sir Francis Burdett, after Northcote in 1811. In 1794 he was examined on treasonable charges before the privy council, but his good-natured attempt to use the occasion to solicit subscriptions for his engraving of General Kosciuszko, after West, ensured his early acquittal. Contemporaries agreed that Sharp was 'by no means qualified to be a conspirator; he was fond of good cheer, grew corpulent from indulging in it, and had the gout' (Bryan, 'Painters', 733). 
Sharp's eccentricity was marked in other ways. He had great faith in the study of physiognomy -- 'Cobbett's profile he likened to that of a bull-dog.... he often eulogised Mr Vansittart and Lord Sidmouth' ('GM', 1st ser., 94/2, 1824, 471) -- but this was thought extravagant. His religious convictions were yet more peculiar, even by the common standards of radical heterodoxy. Having been influenced by the notions of Mesmer and Swedenborg, he became a follower of the enthusiast Richard Brothers, whose portrait he engraved in 1795 as 'The Man whom God has Appointed'. However, on Brothers's confinement as a lunatic later that year, Sharp transferred his allegiance to the fanatic Joanna Southcott, who in 1806 defaced with red paint a thousand copies of his print of Brothers. In 1812 Sharp engraved a portrait of Southcott, towards the cost of whose journey from Exeter and residence in London he had contributed very substantially, and he never lost faith in her pretended divine mission, even after her death in 1814. 
Sharp resided on Chiswick Mall, Chiswick, where he died on 25 July 1824, epitomized, justly, as 'an extraordinary compound of high professional talent, good moral intentions and egregious credulity' (ibid.). He was buried on 29 July in the churchyard of St Nicholas, Chiswick, close to William Hogarth, 'whom he esteemed the most extraordinary painter who had ever existed' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 25223


Sharp, William (1805-1896), physician and homoeopathist, third son and fifth child of Richard Sharp, merchant, and his wife, Mary Turton, was born at Armley, near Leeds, on 21 January 1805. His family had lived in that neighbourhood and at Horton, near Bradford, for several generations. One relation was John Sharp (1645?-1714), archbishop of York; another was Abraham Sharp ('bap'. 1653, died 1742), the astronomer and mathematician. William Sharp was educated at Wakefield grammar school from 1813 to 1816, and at Westminster School, London, from 1817 to 1820. 
Originally destined for the church, Sharp was articled in 1821 to his uncle, William Sharp, a leading surgeon in Bradford. He subsequently served a part of his apprenticeship with his uncle's cousin, William Hey of Leeds. Sharp went to London to complete his training at Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals. In 1826 he obtained the licence of the Society of Apothecaries, and in 1827 he was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. He spent a year in Paris at the Sorbonne before returning to Bradford to assist his uncle, to whose practice he succeeded in 1833. Sharp was elected a surgeon to the Bradford Infirmary in 1829, and became its senior surgeon in 1837; for many years he also had the largest general practice in the West Riding of Yorkshire. In 1856 the degree of MD was conferred upon him by the archbishop of Canterbury. 
During the winter of 1838-9 Sharp gave a course of scientific lectures, which were so successful that he proposed the revival of the Bradford Philosophical Society, originally formed by Joseph Priestley. He was elected as the first president of the new society, whose principal aim was the formation of a local museum, a subject in which Sharp had a particular interest. The museum which was eventually opened in Bradford was the first of its kind in the country. A paper read to the Birmingham meeting of the British Association on the subject of local museums led to Sharp's election as FRS on 7 May 1840. 
In 1843 Sharp left Bradford for Hull, where he lived until 1847. He then moved to Rugby so that his sons could attend Rugby School. Sharp convinced Dr Tait, the headmaster, of the value of the teaching of natural science. As a result he was appointed as the school's first 'reader in natural philosophy'. He thus became the first teacher of science in a public school, setting the example which other schools followed. He resigned the post in 1850, to devote himself more exclusively to medical research. 
At the suggestion of his friend Dr Ramsbotham of Leeds, Sharp next studied homoeopathy, and two years later adopted its methods. While he accepted the basic principle of 'like cures like' he had little time for Samuel Hahnemann, the founder of homoeopathy. Many of his contemporaries were unable to accept Hahnemann's explanatory theories but Sharp went much farther. In his 'Letter to Sir Benjamin Brodie' (1861) he described Hahnemann as 'a visionary, unscientific mind', and in his essay entitled 'Organopathy' (1867) he stated that 'Homoeopathy, as represented by Hahnemann, is vague, indefinite and unproved'. For Sharp, disease was local. He rejected Hahnemann's proposal that most disease was a general condition and concluded that Hahnemann's drug provings had accumulated numerous unnecessary symptoms. According to Sharp, drugs must affect the same organs as the disease affects. This, he said, was 'organopathy'. His alleged discovery that drugs in different doses caused different therapeutic effects gave rise to the allied method of 'antipraxy'. Both these systems were described in Sharp's 'Essays on Medicine' (1874-80). In 1873 Sharp presided at the British Homoeopathic Congress, but his address, which focused on his own ideas, was virulently criticized when reported in the 'British Journal of Homoeopathy'. 
By his own account Sharp played an important part in preventing the inclusion, in the 'Medical Act' of 1858, of proposals that would have prevented the registration of homoeopathic doctors. He wrote brilliantly in defence of homoeopathy but could not avoid including in that defence his own personal theories. Whether by accident or by design, he ignored the work of most homoeopaths who had practised before him. He seemed to regard himself as the saviour of homoeopathy, as if nothing significant had happened before his arrival in 1852. 
Sharp retired from practice in 1877. He continued to write tracts on homoeopathy, which finally totalled sixty-three works, the first twenty-four of which were collected and published in his 'Essays on Medicine'. He also learned Hebrew in order to study the 'Bible' in its original. When the Revised Version was published he submitted several criticisms which were accepted by the editors. 
Sharp was married in 1833 to Anne (1811-1834), daughter of the botanist Samuel Hailstone (1767-1851). After her death he married on 10 March 1836 Emma, sixth daughter of John Scott, vicar of St Mary's, Hull ['see under 'Scott, Thomas]. Sharp died at 4 South Parade, Llandudno, Wales, while on a visit to Llandudno, on 10 April 1896, and was buried at Llan-rhos cemetery. 
Sharp's claim to recognition rests on his encouragement of the teaching of science in schools and for the establishment of local museums. His medical theories were not accepted by the homoeopathic medical community of his time and have passed into oblivion. His apparent view of himself as the saviour of homoeopathy, and indeed of medicine, appears to reflect a personality similar to that which he criticized in Hahnemann. It is regrettable that the energies of one who had so much to contribute were sometimes so sadly misdirected. 


@@@@@


doc= 25224


Sharpe, Bartholomew (b. c.1652), buccaneer, born in Wapping of unknown parents, gave his age in 1682 as about thirty. He claimed to have served under Henry Morgan in the sacking of Panama in 1671. He seems also to have been among those who destroyed Porto Bello in 1679. In an attempt to repeat Morgan's earlier feat, Sharpe and some 330 buccaneers landed on the coast of Darien on 5 April 1680 with the aim of crossing the isthmus and sacking Panama for a second time. This small army included what might now be described as a 'press corps': Basil Ringrose, whose journal was printed as the second volume of Exquemelin's 'Bucaniers of America' (1685), William Dampier, author of 'New Voyage Round the World' (1697), and Lionel Wafer, surgeon and author of 'A New Voyage and Description of the Isthmus of America' (1699). Two lesser figures also left eyewitness narrative accounts relating to the expedition. 
The Indians who led the buccaneers through the forest persuaded them to undertake a preliminary attack on the Spanish settlement at Santa Maria, where great quantities of gold were reputed to be stockpiled. After the attack on Santa Maria on 15 April, which yielded no gold, the buccaneers made their own way, on foot and in canoes, to the port of Panama. On 25 April they surprised a fleet of three ships and 280 Spaniards and took possession of several armed vessels, a coup which offered scope to conduct unlimited operations. After two large-scale defections, Sharpe was elected overall commander on 28 May. With a force reduced to 140 men, and on board a single vessel, the 'Trinity', Sharpe spent the next eighteen months scouring the coast for prizes. On 28 October he attempted an opposed landing on the Chilean coast at Port Ilo, near Arica, before sailing southwards as far as the 30th parallel. On 3 December a raid ashore was repelled by a large force of about 250 Spanish cavalry. On 4 December, despite stiff opposition, the buccaneers entered the town of Coquimbo where an attempt to extort 100,000 pieces of eight from the governor failed, forcing them to withdraw. 
Sharpe now made for Juan Fernandez to resupply before attempting a voyage home through the Strait of Magellan, but the decision to return caused a mutiny and Sharpe was put in irons. On 28 January the 'Trinity' loomed off Arica for a second time and a hundred men disembarked to attack the town. This time the buccaneers were repulsed by a force of more than 600. After the battle twenty-seven buccaneers lay dead and the remainder withdrew to the 'Trinity's' waiting boats. Sharpe was quickly reinstalled as commander. On 28 July 1681, in what are now Equadorian waters, Sharpe overhauled the Spanish vessel 'Rosario'. During the struggle Sharpe shot the captain, John Lopez, and seized a book which the Spaniards were about to heave overboard. On examination the book was found to be a 'derrotero', or waggoner; a secret collection of charts and pilotage directions detailing coastal features and all the anchorages from California to Cape Horn. The 'Rosario' also carried another treasure: she was smuggling a large quantity of silver, coated in tin to avoid duty. Sharpe's subsequent claim that he was unable to persuade his crew to transfer the contraband into the 'Trinity' seems unlikely. He and his crew were probably just ignorant of what lay in the hold. Accordingly, they cut the vessel and her silver adrift. Their error was discovered only when one of the bars, taken as a souvenir, was examined in England. 
The 'Trinity' now remained at sea almost continuously until the second week of October when, after days of heavy storms, Sharpe sighted the mountains of southern Chile and sheltered in a coastal inlet. On 6 November he sailed for the straits but a great storm on the 12th pushed him far south of his intended track. He had no option but to weather the Horn instead, becoming the first English captain to do so in an easterly direction. On 20 November the 'Trinity' reached her most southerly position, 57 degree 40' S, where she steered among icebergs. In sailing so far south Sharpe was able to prove that 'terra australis incognito' was a fiction and this constitutes his greatest achievement. In one manuscript copy of his journal the entry for 28 November 1681 reads: 'in this my passage about Terra del Fuogo I sailed in near 60 degrees south lattitude therefore doe find by experience that there is no such a tract of land as the dutch call Terra australis incognito and that which lies to the eastward of the straghts of Le maire which the Dutch call staten land I found to be an Isle the which I named Albemarle Island & I being the first that ever sailed about all this way doe call the passage after my own name. (Sharpe's journal, Pierpont Morgan Library, MA 3310)' By 26 January 1682 favourable winds allowed the ship to cover distances of up to 132 miles a day. Barbados was sighted on 28 January but the presence of the English warship 'Richmond' forced the buccaneers to steer for Nevis. From here, most of the crew took passage to England, Sharpe arriving in Plymouth on or about 24 March. 
On 10 June 1682 Sharpe and two of his crew were indicted on charges of piracy and murder in the high court of Admiralty. The charges were instigated by the Spanish ambassador to London, Don Pedro Ronquillo, who also acted as chief prosecutor. Evidence that Charles II tampered with the trial in order to obtain an illicit copy of the 'derrotero' and to spare Sharpe's life probably explains the court's decision to acquit the defendants on a technicality. The verdict caused a minor diplomatic incident with Spain. 
After his trial Sharpe was appointed captain of his majesty's sloop 'Bonetta' by the Admiralty. He never took up his command. According to one source he bought a leaky vessel moored in the Thames which he used to board a French vessel near the Downs. In this prize he returned to the Caribbean, appearing in the Leeward Islands with a commission to hunt down pirates in January 1684, and later in Bermuda, where he ingratiated himself with the governor, Richard Coney. In July 1686 the governor of Nevis sent the frigate 'Dartmouth' to Bermuda to bring Sharpe to justice for acts of piracy in Jamaica (1684) and Campeachy (1686). Sharpe stood trial in Nevis on 30 December, and again on 12 February 1687, but he wriggled free both times. In 1688 he appeared in Anguilla, having declared himself governor. 
By 1696 Sharpe had settled on the island of St Thomas, acquiring a smallholding and seven slaves. He seems to have married, and to have had a son. By 1698 he was heavily in debt and, in an attempt to evade his creditors, Sharpe made an arrangement with Captain Garwey, commander of a visiting English vessel, to leave the island secretly. Tipped off by the slaves, the Danish authorities arrested Sharpe on the night of 10 May 1698 as he loaded his chattels into the launch sent to meet him. Swearing to avenge himself upon the island as a whole Sharpe was sentenced to life imprisonment. His wife and son were held in custody in the fort. The governor, J. Lorentz, tried to have Sharpe transferred to Bremerholm prison in Copenhagen but permission was denied. Sharpe's wife died on 30 October 1698, and the boy died on 12 December. Sharpe was still captive in the fort on St Thomas in 1699. About this time he was described as being lame, and without the use of his hands. 


@@@@@


doc= 25225


Sharpe, Charles Kirkpatrick (1781-1851), antiquary and collector, was born at Hoddam (or Hoddom) near Dumfries on 15 May 1781, the third son and seventh child of Charles Sharpe of Hoddam ('c'.1738-1813) and Eleanora Renton (1748-1836), daughter of John Renton of Lammerton. In February 1796 he went to Edinburgh for his education, and from October in that year he attended Professor John Robison's class at the university. He left Edinburgh in May 1798, and after a short period at home, went up to Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 22 November, before graduating BA on 17 June 1802, and proceeding MA on 28 January 1806. Sharpe's education was to have fitted him for a living in the Church of England, but he seems never to have pursued this line with enthusiasm, perhaps because his high-pitched voice was unsuited to the pulpit. After graduation he divided his time between London, Oxford, and Hoddam, but after the death of his father in 1813 he settled with his mother at the family's house at 93 Princes Street, Edinburgh. After her death in August 1836 he lived for a while at 19 West Nicolson Street until, on his eldest brother's death in February 1845, he succeeded to Hoddam, and moved to 28 Drummond Place. He never married, and does not appear to have left Edinburgh or its immediate vicinity between 1813 and his death at home in Drummond Place on 17 March 1851. He was buried at Hoddam. 
Sharpe's significance lies in his antiquarian and other intellectual pursuits. As a child he had listened to ballads and songs in Dumfriesshire. His father had known Burns, though Sharpe's acquaintance seems to have been limited to seeing him at a theatre in Dumfries in October 1792. When Walter Scott's 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border' appeared in 1802, Sharpe immediately sent him copies of 'The Twa Corbies' and 'The Douglas Tragedy'. Scott visited Sharpe in Oxford that year, and though each man was alive to the other's weaknesses (and Sharpe could be extremely unkind about those who tried to help him), they remained on good terms until Scott's death. Scott invited him to collaborate in the 'Edinburgh Review', but he refused 'not only on account of my profound ignorance respecting modern political transactions, but because my style is at least one hundred good years behind that of most people both in strength and eloquence' (NL Scot., MS 3876, fol. 155). However he wrote some poetry, and published 'Metrical Legends and other Poems' in 1807 -- though, in Scott's words in his 'Journal', 'as a poet he has not a very strong touch' -- and he edited ballads. 'A Ballad Book' appeared in 1823 and 'Surgundo, or, The Valiant Christian' in 1837. 
In prose Sharpe preferred Richardson and Fielding to Scott, whose writing he criticized on both literary and antiquarian grounds, though later in life he both admired and encouraged Harrison Ainsworth. In 1808 he wrote a play of which Scott approved, and 'will certainly endeavour to get it acted', he wrote to his sister Isabella, 'but do not whisper one word of it to any mortal, for if it be damned I must never confess myself the author' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. misc. c. 38, fol. 151). He felt himself secure only on antiquarian subjects, and this is where his literary reputation rests. He edited James Kirkton's 'Secret and True History of the Church of Scotland' in 1817, with elaborate notes. His introduction to Robert Law's 'Memorialls' (1818), written at Scott's suggestion and with the use of his library, remains to this day a standard history of witchcraft in Scotland. His editorial work for the Bannatyne Club is of a high quality. His historical interests led him into a number of byways. Witchcraft, female criminality, and historical gossip were supported by an exceptional knowledge of the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century sources. In his copy of Douglas's 'Peerage' (1764), now at the Royal Library, Windsor, more than half the entries are corrected or expanded by his annotations. Occasionally these are coloured by his high-tory views and his taste for marital scandal, but for the most part he gives authority for what he says. As a display of learning it is astonishing. This learning was available to anyone who asked for it, including Robert Chambers, for whose 'Traditions of Edinburgh' (1824-5) he was extremely helpful. He also collaborated with the antiquaries Thomas Thomson and David Laing. 
Sharpe was a draughtsman and painter of more than amateur skill. While at Oxford he produced portraits of his contemporaries (mostly in seventeenth-century dress); his drawing of 'Queen Elizabeth dancing before Melville' caused 'inextinguishable laughter' (J. G. Lockhart, 'Life of Scott', 1882, 3.163) when it was received by Scott in December 1808; and his caricature of Madame de Stael, whom he met in London in 1813, is unflatteringly accurate. He subsequently illustrated several Bannatyne Club publications as well as some of his own work. Scott tried unsuccessfully to have him appointed king's limner in Scotland. 
Sharpe was also a musician. Like his father, he played the fiddle, and at Oxford took piano lessons. His musical library included early printed works, with material he had inherited from his father, acquired from the Edinburgh Musical Society (including the catalogue of its library of orchestral works), or bought. The emphasis is on Handel and the early eighteenth century, and the collection includes Mrs Crokat's music book (1709) (recorded in Grove's 'Dictionary' as long untraced) and music by the earl of Kellie, a selection of whose 'Minuets' he published in 1836. He was also a noted collector. While still at Oxford he was given Lely's portrait of the duchess of Portsmouth. In 1802 he told his mother that he must leave his college lodgings. 'I shall begin then to pack off my knick knacks for Scotland.... You will be overwhelmed with swinging great boxes and charmed with my 'Nell Gwynn' and 'Lady Aston'' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. misc. c. 38, fol. 25). At his death he owned a very considerable number of portraits, including 'Margaret Tudor' by Holbein, Hogarth's 'Sarah Malcolm', Kneller's 'Duchess of Marlborough', and twelve previously in Kellie Castle. He also owned pictures by Breughel, Cranach, Van Eyck, Giorgione, Raeburn, Rembrandt, Reynolds, and Rosa. He acquired, from the hoard of twelfth-century ivory chessmen found around 1830 on Lewis, the eleven pieces now in the Royal Museums of Scotland. He was never a rich man, but he bought with care, and his known taste for historical objects ensured that much was offered to him. His collection was dispersed at his death, either in two sales which lasted in total nearly a fortnight, or to various beneficiaries under his will. It was one of the great private collections of nineteenth-century Scotland, but while it was similar in nature to Scott's, Sharpe's exceptional connoisseurship ensured that the quality of the individual pieces he had gathered was greatly superior. 
Sharpe lived in and for the past. His clothing throughout his life was that of the Oxford undergraduate of the early nineteenth century; his tastes in music, literature, and gossip remained firmly in the mid-eighteenth; and his relationships with others were conducted in a style long outmoded. But his scholarship was real. In the words of his obituarist in 'The Scotsman', his knowledge was like his taste, 'a thing perfect in itself. Whatever might be its limits it was complete and faultless within them' (NL Scot., MS 2511, fol. 3). 


@@@@@


doc= 25226


Charlotte Sharpe (c.1793-1849), miniature painter, was the eldest daughter, and was baptized on 2 July 1793 at St Phillip's, Birmingham. She exhibited nineteen miniature portraits at the Royal Academy between 1817 and 1841, from various London addresses. After her marriage to Captain T. Best Morris in 1821 there was a six-year hiatus in her exhibiting career (1824-9) after which she resumed painting to support her family. The artist Charlotte B. Morris ('fl'. 1828-1867) is thought to be her daughter. A son, J. B. Morris, died in childhood. Charlotte Morris died in 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 25227


Sharpe, Daniel (1806-1856), geologist and philologist, was born on 6 April 1806 at Nottingham Place, Marylebone, Middlesex, the youngest son of Sutton Sharpe (1756-1806), brewer, and his second wife, Maria (died 1806), sister of the poet Samuel Rogers (1783-1855). Orphaned before his first birthday (his mother died on 22 April 1806, his father on 26 September), he was looked after in Stoke Newington by a half-sister, who also took in a sister and four brothers. 
Sharpe was educated for two years at a school in Stoke Newington, and from the age of twelve at Mr Cogan's school in Walthamstow, where he obtained a knowledge of the classics. At sixteen he became a clerk in the counting-house of Van Zeller, a Portuguese merchant in London. When he was twenty-five, Sharpe entered into a partnership with his brother Henry at Pinner's Hall, Broad Street, which became the leading London house in the trade with Portugal. For a year about 1830 and from 1835 to 1838, Sharpe lived in Portugal, which he visited frequently on business. 
Sharpe had a long-standing interest in natural history, and joined the Geological Society of London in 1827. Papers read before the Society from 1832 made use of his travels by describing Portuguese geology, which had hitherto been little known. In the 1840s he turned to the Lake District and north Wales, regions where the older rocks had already become the subject of controversy. Sharpe argued that all of the strata originally identified as belonging to Adam Sedgwick's 'Cambrian' were of the same age as Roderick Murchison's 'Silurian'. This had been suspected for some time on fossil grounds, but Sharpe's structural evidence for an equivalence was new. His brash self-confidence in trespassing on Sedgwick's territory led to puns about a 'sharp move' and the 'Sharp fellow', clear references to the fact that Sharpe spent his days in a counting-house. 
During his research on the older rocks, Sharpe became involved in debates about slaty cleavage, which (as Sedgwick had shown) had to be distinguished from ordinary stratification. Sharpe proposed that this structure resulted, neither from crystallization nor from the force of upheaval, but from lateral pressure. He applied this theory in 1854 to some of the most vexed problems in alpine geology, particularly at Mont Blanc and the valley of Chamonix, where semi-crystalline schists appeared to alternate with younger Jurassic strata. In papers for the Royal Society and the Geological Society, he also tackled the complex geology of the Scottish highlands, and with George Bellas Greenough constructed a revised geological map of Scotland in 1852. 
Sharpe's last paper was his most speculative. It argued that the Alps had been until fairly recently covered by the sea, which had left marks of its presence at a height of some 9000 feet. Sharpe thus ascribed to wave action most of the erosion that other geologists (following Louis Agassiz) attributed to glaciers. However, this bold extension of Robert Chambers's theory of ancient sea terraces won little support. 
Unlike many geologists of the period, Sharpe identified his own fossils rather than sending them out to specialists. His first paper for the Geological Society in 1827 described a new species of ichthyosaurus, and he later became especially interested in invertebrate palaeontology. In 1846, together with John Morris, he identified shells collected from the Falkland Islands by Charles Darwin, and in 1848 he did the same for specimens collected by Charles Lyell during his travels in North America. In both cases Sharpe's results provided strong support for Murchison's concept of a globally valid Silurian fauna. At his death Sharpe was engaged in a monograph for the Palaeontographical Society on the fossil cephalopoda of the English Chalk. 
Sharpe, who never married, became a familiar figure within metropolitan intellectual circles, especially through connections with his uncle Samuel Rogers and friendships made at the Geological Society. Known for his sarcastic wit, love of controversy, and philanthropic benevolence, for many years he served as secretary of the school for the poor in Harp Alley, Fleet Market. A keen student of ancient philology, Sharpe published an appendix on Lycian inscriptions and coins in Sir Charles Fellows's second account of his discoveries at Xanthus. Sharpe was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1850, and became Geological Society president in February 1856. He died a few months later on 31 May 1856 in his lodgings in Soho Square, having fractured his skull in a riding accident. He was buried at St John's Church, Hampstead. 


@@@@@


doc= 25228


Sharpe, Edmund (1809-1877), architect and engineer, was born on 31 October 1809 at Brook Cottage, Brook Street, Knutsford, Cheshire, the only son of Francis and Martha Sharpe. He was educated locally, then at Dr Burney's school at Greenwich, Sedbergh School, and St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1833 and proceeded MA in 1836. In 1832 he was awarded a Worts travelling fellowship, which he devoted to the study of architecture, mainly in France and Germany, with a particular interest in Romanesque and early Gothic work. In 1835 he settled in Lancaster and practised as an architect for fifteen years. On 27 July 1843 he married Elizabeth Fletcher (died 1876), sister of John Fletcher. They had three sons and two daughters. 
Sharpe, along with his partner from 1845 (and former pupil), E. G. Paley, erected nearly forty new churches. Early on he often favoured a simplified Romanesque style, but the most famous works are a pair of all-terracotta Gothic churches at Lever Bridge, Bolton (1842-5), commissioned by his father-in-law, and Rusholme, Manchester (1845-6). He also undertook secular buildings, the most ambitious being Capernwray Hall, Lancashire (1844-7), the remodelling of Hornby Castle, Lancashire (1847-8), and Ince Hall, Cheshire (1847-9). 
Sharpe's vigorous involvement in civic improvements established his reputation far beyond architecture: 'our excellent friend and fellow townsman' the 'Lancaster Gazette' called him as early as 1840 (17 October 1840). A lifelong tory, he was elected to Lancaster council in 1841 and served as mayor for the year 1848-9, when he led the way for major sanitary improvements. In 1850 he purchased the Phoenix foundry in Lancaster and in 1851 withdrew from architecture, although the name Sharpe and Paley was retained by Paley until early 1856. From the 1830s he had been active in promoting railways and in 1856 he went to live at Coed-y-Celyn, near Betws-y-coed, Caernarvonshire, where he organized the building of the Conwy-Llanrwst Railway. In 1859 he was appointed JP for Lancashire, and for Denbighshire. From 1863, when the Conwy valley line opened, until 1866 Sharpe lived abroad, constructing a horse-drawn tramway in Geneva and the Perpignan-Prades railway in south-west France. Although he acquired iron mines and property there, in 1867 he returned to Lancaster. 
Throughout his life Sharpe was an enthusiastic and profound student of medieval architecture, and he published several works on the subject, of which the first was 'Architectural parallels, or, The progress of ecclesiastical architecture in England during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries' (1848). This was followed by: 'Decorated Windows: a Series of Illustrations of the Window Tracery of the Decorated Style' (1849); 'The Seven Periods of Architecture' (1851), in which he advocated a new system of nomenclature for the successive styles of medieval work; 'The Mouldings of the Six Periods of British Architecture' (1874); 'The Architecture of the Cistercians' (1874); and several others. His minor publications were numerous. In 1875 Sharpe received the gold medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects (he became a fellow in 1848) for his architectural writings. He was also a member of the Archaeological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland and contributed many papers to the proceedings of both organizations. In 1869 he joined the Architectural Association, which, during the next few years at his suggestion and under his guidance, made annual excursions for the study of Gothic architecture in Britain and France. An account of the last of these, 'A Visit to the Domed Churches of Charente... in 1875', with a memoir of Sharpe and a complete list of his publications, was drawn up and printed by the association in 1884 as a memorial. While collecting material for further writings, Sharpe died at Milan, after a brief illness, on 8 May 1877; he was buried at Lancaster cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25229


Eliza Sharpe (1796-1874), miniature and subject painter, was the second eldest daughter. She was born in August 1796 in Birmingham and baptized on 21 August 1798 at St Phillip's, Birmingham. She exhibited forty-eight works, primarily portrait miniatures, at the Royal Academy (1817-67). At the Old Watercolour Society -- of which she became a member in 1829 and subsequently secretary -- she showed eighty-four paintings (1829-70), the majority being costume pieces illustrating scenes from literature, although from 1836 her most highly priced (and, it appears, least popular) works were on biblical themes. She was also represented at exhibitions in Liverpool (1838-61) and at the Royal Manchester Instition (1841-53). Between 1831 and 1840 her paintings were often engraved for contemporary annuals. Towards the end of her life she was successful as a copyist of paintings at the South Kensington Museum; five of her nine exhibits at the Society of Female Artists (1860-74) were copies. Although less talented than her sister Louisa, by the 1870s Eliza Sharpe had earned 'a modest little fortune' (Roget, 2.207). She had also achieved a reputation for 'unusually original marked character', frequently manifest in acts of 'enthusiastic benevolence' (Clayton, 1.380). Having occupied at least twelve addresses in London, Eliza Sharpe died, unmarried, on 11 June 1874 at Woodside Poyle, Burnham Beeches, Buckinghamshire, the house of her nephew Mr C. W. Sharpe, the engraver. She was buried in Willesden cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25230


Sharpe, Gregory (1713-1771), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Yorkshire, the son of John Sharpe, solicitor to the Treasury, and his wife. He was educated at Hull grammar school, and later at Westminster School under Dr Robert Freind. At Westminster he committed some irregularity, and from the summer of 1731 he lived for four years at Aberdeen with the classical scholar Thomas Blackwell. During this time, he may have gained an MA from Aberdeen University. On 2 June 1735 he was admitted fellow commoner at Trinity College, Cambridge, and graduated LLB in 1738. He returned to Trinity College on 8 June 1747, and proceeded LLD. On 4 July 1751 he was incorporated at Oxford. 
Sharpe was ordained deacon at Bristol in 1737, and priest at Westminster on 20 January 1739, and served for some time as minister of Broadway Chapel, Westminster. From 1743 to 1756 he was vicar of All Saints, Birling, near Maidstone. He became prebendary of Yetminster secunda in Salisbury Cathedral on 18 March 1757, and vicar of Purton, Wiltshire, in 1761; he held these posts until his death. Sharpe was chaplain to Frederick, prince of Wales, until 1751, and to George III from 1762 to 1771. He gave the fast-day sermons for 1757-9, and gave charity sermons for the London Maternity Hospital for Married Women in 1759, Westminster Hospital in 1764, and the London Asylum for Orphan Girls in 1770. On the death of Samuel Nicolls in 1763 he was elected to the mastership of the Temple, where William Maxwell was his assistant. 
In addition to his sermons Sharpe published widely on religious and classical subjects. He wrote several defences of Christianity, and his 'Rise and Fall of the Holy City and Temple of Jerusalem' (1765) went into a second edition in 1766. He defended the rationalist philosophers Samuel Clarke and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz against Lewis Philip Thummig (1774), and in 1769 contributed a pamphlet to the debate about James Merrick's version of the 'Psalms'. He also published pieces in the 'Monthly Review'. A posthumous collection of his sermons, edited by Joseph Robertson, appeared in 1772. 
Sharpe took a scholarly interest in systems for learning languages. In 1751 he published 'A dissertation upon the origin and structure of the Latin tongue, containing a rational and compendious method of learning Latin', and in the same year brought out a second edition of his 'Seven Letters Containing a New and Easy Method of Learning the Hebrew Language'. He also wrote about Greek, and his 'Origin and Structure of the Greek Tongue' (1767) was reissued in 1777. He contributed the translation of Aristophanes' 'Frogs' to Charlotte Lennox's 1759 edition of 'The Greek Theatre of Father Brumoy', and, with the fourth earl of Shaftesbury, he published in 1766 John Locke's 'Observations upon the Growth and Culture of Vines and Olives', from the original manuscript. In the same year he revised Benjamin Martyn's biography of the first earl of Shaftesbury, later edited by Andrew Kippis (1771) and published about 1790. In 1767 he collected and edited the dissertations of Thomas Hyde. 
Sharpe was elected FRS on 9 May 1754 and was fellow and the director of the Society of Antiquaries when he died, at the master's house in the Temple, on 8 January 1771. He had collected an impressive library, which was sold on 8 April 1778 and over the next ten days. A catalogue was published, listing his fine collection of oriental manuscripts and many valuable prints and drawings in addition to his books, and the library sold for over $577. 


@@@@@


doc= 25231


Sharp, James (1576-1630), Jesuit, was born in Bradford in the West Riding of Yorkshire on 26 September 1576. He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 20 March 1593, graduated BA at Trinity College in 1597, and proceeded MA in 1600. He became a convert to Roman Catholicism and, entering St Alban's College at Valladolid on 21 June 1602, was ordained priest on 14 April 1604. He taught at the English College, Douai, from 1606 to 1607 and then went to England, where he was admitted a member of the Society of Jesus in 1607-8 and was professed in 1622. For a time he was professor of sacred scripture and Hebrew at the English Jesuit college at Louvain. In 1611 he had been sent to England, where he made it his first endeavour to bring about the conversion of his parents. They, however, refused to listen to him, and kept him in strict confinement, seeking to reconvert him to protestantism. He obtained his liberty by proclaiming himself a priest, but thereby incurred the penalty of banishment. After a brief sojourn in the Spanish Netherlands he returned to England under the name of Francis Pollard, and was serving in the Yorkshire district in 1621 and then in Staffordshire. In 1625 he was labouring in Lincolnshire, and in 1628 had removed to Leicestershire. He was the author of 'The triall of the protestant private spirit, wherein their doctrine making the sayd spirit the sole ground and meanes of their beliefe is confuted... the second part, which is doctrinall', published at the English College press at St Omer in 1630. Part one was apparently not published. He also composed a manuscript endorsed 'Annals of F. Polla[rd]. Divers examples of cruelty and persecution in England, especially about York, and of the constancy of the Catholics in the time of King James, 1610, 14 Oct.', held at Stonyhurst College, and later printed in J. Morris's 'Troubles of our Catholic Forefathers' (1877). He died in Lincoln at the residence of St Dominic on 11 November 1630. 


@@@@@


doc= 25232


Sharpe, Lewis (fl. 1640), playwright, is unknown except as the author of 'The Noble Stranger', a comedy which was first acted 'at the Private House in Salisbury Court, by Her Majestie's servants' some time between 1638 and 1640, the year in which it was published. It is dedicated to 'the Worthy Knight, Sir Edmund Williams' and is prefaced with eulogistic verses by Richard Woolfall. From these it appears to have been a popular piece and frequently acted. 
A contemporary, 


@@@@@


doc= 25233


Sharpe, Louisa (bap. 1798, d. 1843), miniature and watercolour painter, was born in Birmingham and baptized on 21 August 1798 at St Phillip's, Birmingham, the third of the four daughters of William Sharpe (1749-1824), engraver, and his wife, Susanna, whose maiden name may have been Fairhead. All four sisters were artists and presumably taught at home by their father although their principal studies were said to have been carried out in French and German galleries. About 1816 the family moved to London and from the following year, when their address was 13 King Street in Covent Garden, Louisa and her sisters Charlotte and Eliza ['see below'] exhibited miniature portraits at the Royal Academy. Frederick, duke of York, was their first patron. Louisa Sharpe was represented by a total of twenty-nine works at the Royal Academy (1817-29), several of these being of actresses and figures connected with the nearby theatrical world. After her election as a member of the Old Watercolour Society on 9 February 1829, she devoted herself to larger subject compositions or costume pieces in watercolour which she also exhibited at the Liverpool Academy (1832-42). Of her thirty-nine exhibits (1829-42) at the society the majority were dramatic, literary scenes evincing pathos or humour. She drew subjects from the works of Sir Walter Scott, Thomas Moore, George Crabbe, Lord Byron, William Harrison Ainsworth, Oliver Goldsmith, Joseph Addison and Sir Richard Steele, and from contemporary periodical literature. A principal attraction at the gallery, where they sold readily, her pictures were noted for their 'high degree of finish' (Roget, 2.43) and for an innovative 'bold style of watercolour drawing' (Clayton, 1.380). Her most detailed and elaborate subjects were priced at 100 guineas. Between 1829 and 1839 Louisa Sharpe's work was widely engraved to illustrate literature in contemporary annuals such as 'The Forget-me-Not' (1829, 1831, 1836), 'The Keepsake' (1831-3, 1835, 1837), 'Portraits of the Principal Female Characters in the Waverley Novels' (1832-4), 'Heath's Book of Beauty' (1833-7), 'Fisher's Drawing-Room Scrap-Book' (1839), and 'Heath's Gallery of British Engravings' (1836, 1838). In 1824 Eliza, Louisa and Mary Anne Sharpe moved to 44 Upper Charlotte Street and subsequently shared several addresses in central London. After her marriage, in 1834, to Dr Woldemar Seyffarth (a professor and author who later, after his wife's death, was commissioner from the king of Saxony to the London International Exhibitions in 1851 and 1862), Louisa Seyffarth lived in Dresden. She had two children, one of whom, Agnes Seyffarth ('fl'. 1850-1859), was also a painter. She died in Dresden, 'of a painful disorder', on 28 January 1843. 








@@@@@


doc= 25234


Mary Anne Sharpe (1802-1867), miniature and subject painter, was born in Birmingham, and baptized on 31 December 1802 at St Martin's, Birmingham. She exhibited from the same London addresses as her sister Eliza. She was represented by nineteen works at the Royal Academy (1819-63), twenty-five at the Society of British Artists (1826-64) of which she was elected an honorary member in 1830, ten at exhibitions in Liverpool (1831-59), two at the Royal Manchester Institution (1847-52), and six at the Society of Female Artists (1860-65). She died in 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 25235


Roger Sharpe (fl. 1610), poet, is known only as the author of 'More Fooles Yet, Written by R. S.', a collection of epigrams published in 1610; an address to the reader is signed Roger Sharpe. 


@@@@@


doc= 25236


Sharpe, Samuel (1799-1881), Egyptologist and biblical scholar, second of the six children of Sutton Sharpe (1756-1806), brewer of King Street and of 10 Nottingham Place, Marylebone, Middlesex, and his second wife, Maria (died 1806), third daughter of Thomas Rogers, banker, was born in King Street, Golden Square, London, on 8 March 1799, and baptized at St James's, Piccadilly, on 13 April. His mother, a descendant of Philip Henry, was sister of Samuel Rogers the poet; Daniel Sharpe was Samuel's younger brother. After the death of his mother and then his father's bankruptcy and death, Samuel was cared for by his half-sister Catherine; the family moved to Paradise Row, Stoke Newington. In summer 1807, Samuel became a boarder in the school of Eliezer Cogan at Higham Hill, Walthamstow. At Christmas 1814 he was taken into the banking house of his uncles, Samuel and Henry Rogers, at 29 Clement's Lane, Lombard Street, and remained connected with the firm until 1861, having been made partner in 1824. Methodical, punctual, and cautious, Sharpe proved a successful businessman. In 1821 the Sharpe family moved to 12 New Ormond Street, as his brothers needed to reside closer to their places of business. 
Brought up in the Church of England, Sharpe came gradually to adopt the unitarian views held by his mother's family, after extensive reading, notably of the 'New Testament' in Greek, and personal reflection; in 1821 he joined the congregation of William Johnson Fox at South Place, Finsbury. For many years Sharpe and his brothers taught classes, before office hours, in the Lancasterian School in Harp Alley, Farringdon Street. Sharpe was elected a fellow of the Geological Society on 1 June 1827 but took a greater interest in mathematics and archaeological research, as shown by contributions between 1828 and 1831 to the 'Philosophical Magazine'. He married at Tottenham, on 30 July 1827, his cousin Sarah (1796-1851), daughter of Joseph Sharpe; they had six children, of whom two daughters survived him. The younger of their surviving daughters was Matilda Sharpe. The couple settled in 4 Canonbury Place, Islington and stayed there until 1840, when they moved to nearby 32 Highbury Place. 
Sharpe's interest in Egyptology was aroused by the research of Thomas Young (1773-1829). He read the works of J. F. Champollion and John Gardner Wilkinson, learned Coptic, and formed a hieroglyphic vocabulary. Before publishing his first book, 'The Early History of Egypt' (1836), he consulted his uncle, Samuel Rogers, who said, 'Why, surely you can do it if Wilkinson can; his only thought is where to buy his kid gloves' (Clayden, 65). The first part of his 'Egyptian Inscriptions', published in the spring of 1837, contained the largest collection of hieroglyphical writing yet published, and it was followed by a second part in 1841 and a second series in 1855. His 'Rudiments of a Vocabulary of Egyptian Hieroglyphics' was published in the autumn of 1837; in the introduction he stated his general method of investigation, which involved deducing the meaning of a word from its context in a phrase including other known ciphers. He allowed that the results were often tentative. Sharpe had a natural gift for decipherment, often amusing his friends by the facility with which he would read off a difficult cryptogram. In the autumn of 1838 his 'History of Egypt under the Ptolemies' appeared and in 1842 his 'History of Egypt under the Romans'; these two works were incorporated with the 'Early History' in 'The History of Egypt' (1846). Sharpe collaborated with Joseph Bonomi, a personal friend, in several publications and articles, notably 'The Chronology and Geography of Ancient Egypt' (1849), 'The Triple Mummy Case of Aro Eri-Ao' (1858), 'Egypt, Nubia, and Ethiopia' (1862), and 'The Alabaster Sarcophagus of Oimenepthah I' (1864). He was also involved with Bonomi and Owen Jones in the preparation of the Egyptian courts in the Crystal Palace exhibitions of 1854. He dated the monuments, composed the hieroglyphic inscriptions to Queen Victoria, and contributed to the publication 'Description of the Egyptian Courts in the Crystal Palace' (1854). 
Sharpe was on friendly terms with Samuel Birch of the British Museum, but he was annoyed when the institution's trustees refused to buy the fine statue of Prince Khaemwese, son of Rameses II, in 1866. He himself purchased the statue for about $500 and presented it to the museum. His later Egyptological publications included 'Egyptian Hieroglyphics' (1861), 'Egyptian Antiquities in the British Museum' (1862), 'Egyptian Mythology and Egyptian Christianity' (1863), 'The Decree of Canopus' (1870), and 'The Rosetta Stone' (1871). The pains and skill of his workmanship were unquestioned; but he worked very independently, and on many points his conclusions were not accepted by contemporary scholars of Egyptology. He said of himself, 'I am a heretic in everything, even among Unitarians' (Clayden, 72). His research has since been superseded by later scholarship. Sharpe's contribution to Egyptology lay in his publications of accurate copies of hieroglyphic inscriptions which made these widely available to scholars and which still remain a useful reference source. Together with Wilkinson he was instrumental in exciting interest in Egyptology among the general public through popular works. 
Sharpe's work as a translator of the 'Bible' began with 'The New Testament Translated' (1840), a revision of the Authorized Version of the 'New Testament'. His Greek text was that of the German 'New Testament' scholar J. J. Griesbach, and to this he always adhered, taking little interest in the progress of purely textual studies. His revision of the Authorized Version of the 'Old Testament', 'The Hebrew Scriptures, Translated', was first issued in 1865. In eight editions of his 'New Testament', and four of his old, he devoted great care to the improvement of his work. As a translator he was unoriginal but showed sound judgement; he was successful beyond others of his time in the difficult experiment of removing the archaisms without destroying the stylistic beauty of the English 'Bible'. Among the last advocates of unpointed Hebrew, he published manuals for instruction in this system, notably 'A Short Hebrew Grammar without Points' in 1877; his plan of printing his Hebrew extracts with capital letters, for the proper names and the beginnings of sentences, was unique. Apart from several exegetical works, he published 'History of the Hebrew Nation and its Literature' (1869), and, combining his interest in archaeology and biblical studies, 'Texts from the Bible Explained by... Ancient Monuments' (1866), 'Hebrew Inscriptions from the Valleys between Egypt and Mount Sinai' (1875), and 'An Inquiry into the Age of the Moabite Stone' (1879). As with his Egyptian works, he proved a popularizer of biblical studies, linking archaeology and the 'Bible' within the limits of the scholarship of his day. When, in 1870, the project of a revised version of the 'New Testament' was undertaken by the convocation of Canterbury, Sharpe was one of four scholars of his denomination invited to select a member of their body to co-operate with the New Testament Revision Company. 
In purely theological controversies Sharpe took little part, though he was a zealous propagandist for religious and educational causes of which he approved. His various benefactions to University College School and to University College, in London, exceeded $15,000, and he was a great benefactor of the Unitarian church. He wrote constantly for some years for the unitarian paper 'The Inquirer', founded in 1842 by Edward Hill, though he thought newspaper writing 'a bad employment' (Clayden, 112). He resumed it, however, in 1876, when the 'Christian Life' was started by his friend Robert Spears, and wrote a weekly article until his death. He had contributed papers, chiefly biblical, to the 'Christian Reformer', between 1834 and 1863, and to many minor periodicals. He also wrote a memoir of his uncle, 'Some Particulars of the Life of Samuel Rogers' (1859). He was a trustee of Dr Daniel Williams's foundations between 1853 and 1857; a member of the committee of management of University College, London, from 1866; president of the British and Foreign Unitarian Association in 1869-70; and president of Manchester College (later at Oxford) in 1876-8. 
Sharpe spent his later years in retirement, though his house was still the resort of literary friends and young disciples. He suffered from progressive paralysis from April 1881, probably caused by a series of small strokes. He died at 32 Highbury Place, London, on 28 July 1881, and was buried at Abney Park cemetery on 3 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 25237


Sharpeigh, Alexander (d. 1613), merchant and sea captain, from Biddenden, Kent, was in 1608 and 1609 the commander of the East India Company's fourth voyage to Aden, Surat, and Bantam. In his youth he served as an apprentice to a member of the Levant Company and was, in that capacity, a factor in Constantinople. It is known from his will that he then became the captain of a merchant ship, the 'Adventure', and accrued capital of at least $500 trading in the Mediterranean for, among other commodities, grogram yarn and Venetian glass. 
The chief aim of the fourth voyage was to establish trade with Aden and Surat. Fifty-six subscribers between them invested $33,000 in shares each worth $550 (parts of which might in turn be privately sold to under-subscribers). Of this capital the company spent nearly $1750 on purchasing two ships, the 'Ascension' and 'Union', $14,600 on operating costs such as victuals and wages, $3400 on goods such as cloth, iron, and tin, and $15,000 in specie, chiefly Spanish reales. Sharpeigh himself bought one share in the voyage, and sold a quarter of this share to Sir Henry Lello and a quarter to a merchant, Stephen Harvey. To further his own trading prospects on the voyage Sharpeigh carried with him $100 worth of specie, and other commodities such as tobacco and gilded ornaments in partnership with other merchants. Whatever hopes the subscribers and Sharpeigh himself may have had for the voyage, the amount they recovered was to be no greater than 3 shillings and 6 pence in the pound, or 17.5 per cent of the original investment. Shipwrecks of both ships were to claim most of the capital the investors subscribed. 
Sharpeigh, in command of the 'Ascension' and 'Union', departed in April 1608 but misfortune beset the voyage, on more than one occasion caused by bad judgement. A day after setting sail from the Cape of Good Hope, a storm caused the ships to be separated. Proceeding to Aden in the 'Ascension', in April 1609 Sharpeigh handled negotiations with the Ottoman beylerbeyi with prudent caution, trading a few goods in a spirit of mutual mistrust. Unable to establish a factory, he then sailed for Surat. In September he reached landfall at Mahuwa, where local mariners warned him of the dangerous shoals in the Gulf of Cambay. The master of the ship, Philip de Grave, according to John Jourdain (114), 'stormed very much that he had brought the ship so far and now must have a pilot to carry him 20 leagues'. Sharpeigh deferred to Grave, and on the approach to Surat, without a pilot, the 'Ascension' ran aground. The crew made a landing near Surat, but the goods were lost. 
The fate of shipwreck was also to befall the 'Union', under the captaincy of Richard Rowles. Not finding Sharpeigh at Madagascar or Socotra, Rowles sailed for Bantam, where he traded for spices. Members of the crew successively succumbed to illness, however, and on the return voyage to England, only four weakened survivors remained when the ship drifted uncontrolled onto the coast of Brittany. The 25,000 reales left behind at Bantam, and invested for subsequent ladings to England, was the only capital which yielded a return for subscribers to the fourth voyage. 
Sharpeigh spent the next three years accompanying Sir William Hawkins and Sir Henry Middleton. Denied entry into Surat by the governor (a position encouraged by the Portuguese), Sharpeigh and his crew joined Hawkins at Agra and the court of the Mughal emperor, Jahangir ('c'.1570-1627); he spent upwards of twenty months there. Reports that the sixth voyage under the command of Middleton would be arriving soon and anxiety about the weakening position of the English at the Mughal court prompted Sharpeigh in July 1611 to meet the fleet near Surat. According to Nicholas Downton, Middleton came to rely on Sharpeigh almost exclusively for advice. When they sailed to Bantam, however, Middleton was unsuccessful in his bid to secure the position of chief merchant of the factory for Sharpeigh, who, instead of remaining with Middleton or holding a lesser position, in December 1612 led an expedition to Sukadana in south-western Borneo, known for its diamond mines. Soon thereafter Sharpeigh disappeared, and he died either in Batavia or on the second leg of the voyage. 
Sharpeigh's will was proved on 11 June 1620, seven years after his family received letters informing them of his disappearance. John Eldred, the well-known traveller and merchant, was to oversee any commercial transactions that needed to be completed. Sharpeigh made several small bequests to his mother, his sisters, and their children, the remainder to be divided between his brothers, John and Richard. Five merchants were to divide his much devalued East India Company stock. Sharpeigh did not marry but was enamoured of Ruth Percy (died 1608) of Plymouth, leaving her $30 for 'the interchangeable love and entire affection between us'. He also made a charitable bequest to the poor of Biddenden, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 25238


Sharpey, William (1802-1880), physiologist, was born at Arbroath, Forfarshire, on 1 April 1802. He was the youngest of five children of Henry Sharpey (1758-1801), a shipping agent from Folkestone, Kent, who died before William was born, and his wife, Mary Balfour (1774-1836), from a well-known Arbroath family. Two other sons died in infancy; two daughters subsequently married. Sharpey's mother married, in 1806, William Arrott, a medical practitioner in the town, raising two daughters and four sons, three of whom became doctors. 
Sharpey was educated at his local school and entered the University of Edinburgh in November 1817 to study the humanities and natural philosophy. He commenced medical studies in 1818, learning anatomy from John Barclay at the extramural school; he obtained the diploma of the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1821. Rather than take up medical practice he sought further education and spent some months at the Brookes school of anatomy in London before going to Paris for a year, learning anatomy and surgery. Here he met James Syme, the famous Edinburgh surgeon, with whom he maintained a close friendship for the rest of his life. In August 1823 Sharpey graduated MD at Edinburgh with a thesis on stomach cancer and then returned to Paris for the greater part of 1824. He went home to Arbroath, where he assisted in his stepfather's practice, but he soon decided to devote himself entirely to anatomical and physiological pursuits. 
Sharpey therefore returned to the continent in 1827, spending time with Panizza in Pavia, Rudolphi in Berlin, and Tiedemann in Heidelberg, among others. Back in Edinburgh by 1829 he prepared a thesis, 'On the pathology and treatment of false joints', which obtained for him the fellowship of the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1830 and his recognition by the college as an extramural teacher. He gave his first course of lectures at the extra-academical school in 1831-2 in association with Allen Thomson, who became his lifelong friend and correspondent. Sharpey was successful as a teacher; the numbers in his class rose in each of the five years he was in Edinburgh. 
During this time Sharpey undertook his only piece of research, on ciliary movement, which gained him election to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1834. Although not the first to recognize cilia, he made an original contribution in the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal' in 1830, well before the classical paper of Purkinje and Valentin (1834), which he translated into English. He also wrote a scholarly review of the subject for Todd's 'Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology' (1836). In the summer of 1836, at the suggestion of Richard Quain, he successfully applied for the new chair of anatomy and physiology at University College, London, which he held until he retired in 1874. There he taught, for the first time in England, a course of systematic physiology; previously this subject had been treated only as an appendage to anatomy. Almost unwittingly he acquired the reputation for which he is now chiefly remembered: the father of modern physiology in Britain. This is a somewhat paradoxical title since he was neither a laboratory physiologist nor the founder of a notable school of physiology. Nor did he write a textbook on the subject, although he often complained of the lack of a suitable one for his students. His only writing during his professorship was as a joint author of several editions of Quain's 'Elements of Anatomy'. 
Nevertheless, Sharpey had a considerable personal influence which motivated a number of distinguished physiologists of the next generation. In part this was due to his position as a secretary of the Royal Society which he held from 1854 to 1872, concurrently with his professorship; he had been elected FRS in 1839 and was a member of its council from 1844. During this time he communicated many valuable papers by non-fellows to meetings of the society and he refereed over sixty manuscripts submitted for publication in its 'Transactions'. A significant example of the latter was his report on the classical paper by A. V. Waller on degeneration in nerve (1850). From his extensive knowledge of continental work Sharpey was able to refer to earlier papers on this subject which Waller had missed but he also recognized the importance of the new work and recommended its publication. 
It was through his teaching at University College that Sharpey's influence was strongest. His lectures stimulated the interest of John Marshall, the anatomist, who wrote a textbook of physiology (1867) based on Sharpey's course, and Joseph Lister, who published some valuable physiological papers on vasomotor nerves and inflammation before taking up his surgical career. However, the single most important event which led to the re-establishment of British physiology was the foundation, on Sharpey's recommendation, of a lectureship in practical physiology at University College in 1855. The first holder, J. B. Hayes, a Sharpey pupil, left after giving only one course; he was succeeded in turn by George Harley, Michael Foster, Edward Schafer, who later took the name Sharpey-Schafer as a mark of his profound admiration for his teacher, and John Burdon Sanderson. These former students and colleagues were directly responsible for the development of physiology as an independent discipline based at first on University College, London, but extending to the establishment of distinguished schools of physiology at Cambridge, Oxford, and Edinburgh. They all acknowledged their gratitude and their affection for their teacher. His strong support for physiology was shown by his evidence to the 1875 royal commission on the use of animals in experiments and also as a founder member of the Physiological Society the following year. He and Charles Darwin were immediately elected honorary members. Other distinctions included membership of the General Medical Council, a trustee of the Hunterian Museum and, in 1860, an honorary LLD from Edinburgh University. 
In 1871 a Sharpey scholarship in physiology was established in his honour by his colleagues at University College, to which he subsequently bequeathed the greater part of his modest estate. His former students and his obituarists wrote warmly of Sharpey's personal qualities as a teacher and friend. His letters to Allen Thomson over a period of forty years show him to be shrewd, witty, observant, and greatly interested in the activities of all those who shared his academic world. He displayed a lack of financial ambition and showed no animosity to those with whom he disagreed. He had the power of attaching his pupils by ties of personal affection as well as those of common scientific interest. Sharpey's knowledge was wide, accurate, and up to date, and included the works of French and German authors. His loyalty to the two institutions which he served, University College and the Royal Society, never wavered, even when he was offered the prospect of the chair of anatomy at Edinburgh. He enjoyed visiting Scotland, travelling by sea to Dundee before the railway line opened in the 1840s. 
Of the few anecdotes about Sharpey on record, one which shows his self-deprecating humour was his remark, to George Harley, that, as he was now an old man he should find a young wife since, in anticipation of marriage, he had contributed for fifty years to a Scottish Widows Fund which now refused to pay out unless there was a widow. 
Sharpey never married, however. In London he lived mainly in the Russell Square area and Hampstead, where he was looked after by his niece Mary Colvill, daughter of his sister Elizabeth. She died in 1878 and he took lodgings at 50 Torrington Square, where he died on 11 April 1880 after an attack of bronchitis. He was buried on 17 April in the family plot in the abbey graveyard at Arbroath, the home town which he always remembered with affection. 


@@@@@


doc= 25239


Sharpham, Edward (bap. 1576, d. 1608), playwright and pamphleteer, was baptized on 22 July 1576 at Colehanger, East Allington, Devon, the third of five children of Richard Sharpham (died 1581) and Mary Pomeroy ('b'. 1548). His father died when he was five; his mother later married Alexander Hext (died 1588), with whom she had three more children, and Charles Barnaby (died 1596) of Clement's Inn. In 1592 she sued Thomas Fortescue for allegedly using witchcraft to kill her first husband and make her fall in love with Fortescue. In February 1596 Sharpham sued Fortescue and William Bastard of the Middle Temple for allegedly tampering with evidence related to the case (Eccles, 120). 
Sharpham undoubtedly attended grammar school in Devon, possibly at Plymouth under the pedagogue William Kemp. On 9 October 1594 he was admitted to the Middle Temple. Although he never had chambers there and was never called to the bar, he was associated with the Middle Temple to the end of his life, and his plays show the influence of inns of court revels. In 1597 he published a cony-catching pamphlet entitled 'The Discoverie of the Knights of the Poste', a picaresque first-person account of rogues and criminals on the road between London and Exeter. This work was attributed only to 'E. S.', but Petter summarizes the strong evidence for Sharpham's authorship (Petter, 72-9). 
For the next decade Sharpham must have associated with inns of court literary circles, but documentary evidence of his activities is lacking. Ben Jonson called Sharpham a 'rogue' ('Ben Jonson', 1.133), but he may still be the 'E. S.' who wrote a commendatory poem for Jonson's 'Volpone' (1607). His authorship of two plays printed in 1607, 'The Fleire' and 'Cupid's Whirligig', is more certain. 'The Fleire' was written for the Blackfriars Boys between late 1605 and its entry in the Stationers' register on 13 May 1606. The play is a cynical, thinly veiled satire of King James's court, modelled on John Marston's 'The Malcontent' and 'The Fawne' with elements of the Gunpowder Plot thrown in. It was apparently quite popular, being printed in editions of 1607, 1610, 1615, and 1631. 

'Cupid's Whirligig' was written in early 1607 for the Children of the King's Revels at the Whitefriars, and probably produced that spring. On 30 August Sharpham was in debt to Richard Edwards for four felt hats he had borrowed earlier, possibly for this production. The play is another satire, parodying Lyly and again influenced by Marston, but it shows signs of hasty construction. The character of Nucome may have been a jab at King James's favourite Robert Carr, and Leech shows that the text was altered to remove satiric references to the Scots. The play was printed later in 1607 with a dedication to fellow Devonian Robert Hayman, and was reprinted in 1611, 1616, and 1630. On 22 April 1608, ill with the plague, Sharpham made a will which divided up his colourful wardrobe among friends and relatives. The next day he was buried in St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 25240


Sharples, James (1751/2-1811), portrait painter, was born into a Roman Catholic family in Lancashire. His brother, Henry, became a timber merchant in Liverpool and a half-sister, Mrs Talbot, was subprioress in a Catholic school. His parents sent him to study for the priesthood in France, but he decided instead to become an artist. A bequest from an uncle possibly assisted him in this decision. He may have studied with George Romney, and in 1774 he exhibited a portrait and two miniatures at the first exhibition of the Liverpool Society of Artists, when his address was given as Duke Street, Liverpool. From 1779 to 1785 he occasionally exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy. In 1781 he advertised himself as a 'Portrait Painter in Oil and Crayons' in the 'Bristol Advertizer' (28 July 1781), and exhibited in Bristol 'upwards of one hundred specimens of known characters' (Miles, 725). By 1785 he had moved to London and married twice. The sons of his first and second marriages, George and Felix Thomas (1786-1832x49), both became artists. After his second wife's death Sharples returned to Liverpool, where about 1787 he married Ellen Wallace (1769-1849) ['see under 'Sharples, Rolinda], a Quaker. She had been his pupil in Bath. Their two children, James junior ('c'.1788-1839) and Rolinda Sharples (1793-1838) both became artists. 
In 1793 Sharples set out with his young family for the United States of America. After a delay of seven months, when their ship was interned at Brest after being captured by a privateer, they arrived in New York. They settled in Philadelphia, where Sharples executed small profile portraits, mostly in pastels. The American painter William Dunlap recorded that Sharples carried letters of introduction to 'persons distinguished, either military, civil or literary, with a request to paint their portraits for his collection. This being granted, and the portrait finished in about two hours, the likeness generally induced an order for a copy, and brought as sitters all who saw it. His price for the profile was $15; and for the full-face (never so good) $20. (Miles, 725)' Ellen Miles notes that: 'The portraits were on thick, textured, gray paper measuring about nine by seven inches. The outlines of the bust-length portraits were apparently drawn with a mechanical instrument to ensure physiognomic accuracy. The powdered colors, applied with a fine brush, were predominantly black, gray, and white, with flesh tones for the faces and blue for the backgrounds. (ibid.)' His earliest recorded commissions were from George Washington in 1796. These included portraits of Washington himself (National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution; City of Bristol Museum; two pastel copies after Sharples, NPG; a copy by Ellen Sharples, Yale University Art Gallery); Motier Lafayette, the son of the marquis de Lafayette; and the president's wife, Martha, and adopted grandson, George Washington Parke Custis. Other sitters included Alexander Hamilton (1755/7-1804), Gouverneur Morris (1752-1816), and the chemist Joseph Priestley (all National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution). James and Dolley Madison and Thomas Jefferson also sat to Sharples in Philadelphia. In her diary Ellen Sharples noted that 'copies were frequently required; these I undertook and was so far successful as to have as many commissions as I could execute; they were thought equal to the originals, price the same' (ibid.). Her long-continued practice of making replicas has sometimes confused attempts to attribute individual works to Sharples. 
After working in New York from October 1797 to 1801, when his name sometimes appears in trade directories as Sharpless, concern about the possibility of war between England and France led Sharples to return with his family to England. He continued to take likenesses and to exhibit his American portraits. His sons James and Felix returned to America in 1806 and worked as pastel portraitists in New York state and in Virginia. Sharples returned with his wife and daughter in 1809, settling in New York. He made working visits to Niagara Falls and Philadelphia but his health deteriorated, and he died in New York as a result of a heart attack on 26 February 1811, and was buried in St Peter's Roman Catholic Church in the city. Ellen offered for sale his collection of portraits of distinguished Americans in the New York 'Public Advertizer' (6 April-10 July 1811) and returned to England with Rolinda and James junior. Felix Sharples remained in the United States and had died by 1849 in North Carolina. His collection of his father's unsold portraits is now at Independence National Historical Park, Philadelphia. The portraits retained by Ellen Sharples went first to the Bristol Fine Arts Academy and are now in Bristol City Art Gallery. These include portraits of Sir Humphrey Davy, Sir William Herschel, William Godwin, and Robert Southey. Further examples of his work are in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, and Boston Museum. 
Dunlap, who sat to Sharples, thought his works 'strikingly like' and described him as 'a plain, well-disposed man [who] accumulated property by honest industry, and uncommon facility with his materials' (Miles, 726). His interest in the application of mechanical aids to his art also led him to take out patents in England on three designs for machinery in 1791, 1802, and 1804. He also designed a special carriage to carry his family and working materials in America. His portraits of American sitters continue to be appreciated not only for their strikingly accurate likenesses, but for recording prominent figures of historical importance, particularly leaders of the American War of Independence. 


@@@@@


doc= 25241


Sharples, James (1825-1893), blacksmith and artist, was born on 4 September 1825 in Wakefield, Yorkshire, one of the thirteen children of James Sharples ('c'.1793-1855), blacksmith and wrought iron worker, and his wife, Margaret ('c'.1797-1854). Both Sharples's grandfathers were blacksmiths, and Sharples himself entered the trade as a smithy boy, working in a foundry at the age of ten. He was later set to work in an engine shop where he heated and carried rivets for the boilermakers. It is said that he expressed his early aptitude for art by drawing boiler designs in chalk on his mother's kitchen floor, and it was with her support and that of an elder brother that he was encouraged to pursue his talent. At sixteen he attended weekly art classes at Bury Mechanics' Institute and he spent what little spare time he had outside the foundry in making copies of drawings, and in improving his reading so that he could better understand the principles of art. 
Having made his own easel, palette, and canvas, Sharples taught himself oil painting from a shilling guide and after initial disappointments produced a copy of an engraving, 'Sheep-Shearing', which he sold for a half-crown. This gave him the confidence to attempt a more ambitious work and he began making sketches while working in the foundry, where he opted for the heavier kind of iron work, allowing him more time to draw while waiting for the metal to heat. He learned perspective from Brook Taylor's 'Principles' and techniques for depicting the human form from Flaxman's 'Anatomical Studies'. 
The result of this endeavour was a large painting called 'The Forge', completed about 1849. The artistic merits of this painting, which was solid in its conception and execution, were less impressive than the trials that had been undergone to produce it, and Sharples was justly celebrated for his achievement. Samuel Smiles used him as one of the 'illustrations of character and conduct' in 'Self-Help' (1860) and the success of the picture encouraged Sharples to consider full-time painting. But, as Smiles noted, 'not obtaining sufficient employment at portraits to occupy his time, or give him the prospect of a steady income, he had the good sense to resume his leather apron, and go on working at his honest trade' (Smiles, 135). He painted one other large work, 'The Smithy', and in 1851 won a prize for an emblematical design offered by the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, of which he was a member. 
The suggestion that 'The Forge' would make an admirable reproduction prompted Sharples next to learn the art of steel-engraving, and in 1859, after many years of Labour, he completed a work that was as remarkable in its way as the original. The quality of his etching, part line engraving and part mezzotint, was noted in the London art journals and copies were widely sold. But a combination of bad luck and naivety deprived Sharples of most of the profit from this venture and to the end he was reliant upon the foundry for an income. 
Sharples married on 7 April 1852 Sarah Moore (1832-1861), with whom he had one son and a daughter, who died in infancy; after his first wife's death he married Sarah Ford on 20 June 1863, with whom he also had a son and a daughter. Sharples died in Blackburn, where he had settled, on 13 June 1893 and was buried at the town's cemetery four days later. Of 'The Forge', which defined him as an artist and as a man, and serves as his epitaph, Sharples wrote: 'The picture simply represents the interior of a large workshop such as I have been accustomed to work in' (Smiles, 227). 


@@@@@


doc= 25242


Sharples, Rolinda (1793-1838), portrait and genre painter, was born on 3 September 1793, probably in Bath, the second child and only daughter of James Sharples (1751/2-1811) and of his third wife, 
Rolinda first decided to be a professional artist at the age of thirteen. She initially concentrated on portrait painting, mostly in oil and often of her Clifton acquaintances. Many of her friends were depicted in her first major work, 'The Cloak Room, Clifton Assembly Rooms', completed in 1818 (Bristol Museum and Art Gallery). This charming picture of Bristol's social scene has aptly illustrated the corus of more than one novel by Jane Austen. The perspective and scale are uncertain and the poles are contrived and a little stiff, for the observation of the thirty-one gentlefolk there depicted is acute, friendly, and even witty. Rolinda depicted an event at which she would have been at ease. Much larger and more ambitious scenes of Bristol life followed: 'The Market' and 'Rownham Ferry' (Sothebys, 15 July 1992, lot 15) were shown at the Royal Academy in 1820 and 1822, respectively, and 'St James's Fair' (priv. coll.) and 'The Stoppage of the Bank' (Bristol Museum and Art Gallery) were exhibited at the Society of British Artists in 1825 and 1827. The subject of the last painting had been suggested by the failure of a Bristol bank in 1822 and was chosen by Rolinda because it was 'well suited to a great variety of expression' (diaries of Ellen and Rolinda Sharples, 'Reminiscences'). The artist's apparently uncritical detachment from the human tragedies she was depicting is still more apparent in 'The Trial of Colonel Brereton' (1832-4; Bristol Museum and Art Gallery). Brereton was tried for negligence in the handling of the Bristol riots of October 1831. After only two days of the trial, which Rolinda attended, he committed suicide. While the artist's diary suggests a genuine sympathy for 'the poor and much pitied Col. Brereton' (Rolinda Sharples's diary, 1832), the printing is a laborious social almanac including over a hundred portraits, many of persons who did not even attend the trial. More successful was her last large Bristol scene, 'Clifton Race Course' (Bristol Museum and Art Gallery), completed in 1836. Rolinda died of breast cancer on 10 February 1838 at 3 St Vincent Parade, Holwells, Bristol, whither she and her mother had moved from 2 Lower Harley Place, Clifton, in 1831. She was buried in St Andrew's churchyard, Clifton. Her mother gave $2000 to the nascent Bristol Academy of Fine Arts, and bequeathed to it a further $3465 and her large collection of works by members of her family on her death in 1849. Today she is acknowledged as the founder of what is now the Royal West of England Academy. 
Rolinda Sharples was born into a family of professional artists with a modest income from property and capital investments. She had little social contact with her fellow Bristol artists perhaps as much because of her social status as her gender. Her formal training was limited to a series of lessons from Philip Reinagle in London in 1814 and 1820. The principal influences upon her work, however, were the paintings of the Bristol artist Edward Bird RA (1772-1819). Her genre or narrative paintings, most notably 'The Stoppage of the Bank', are also closely comparable to other works of the 1820s by Bristol artists such as E. V. Rippingille (1798-1859) and Samuel Colman (1780-1845) and she was undoubtedly a significant member of the Bristol school of artists. 


@@@@@


doc= 25243


Sharrock, Robert (bap. 1630, d. 1684), Church of England clergyman and natural historian, was baptized at Drayton Parslow, Buckinghamshire, on 29 June 1630, one of the four sons and two daughters of Robert Sharrock (died 1671) and his wife, Judith. His father was rector of Drayton Parslow from 1639 to 1642 and subsequently of Adstock, in the same county. In 1643 he went to Winchester School as a scholar, and in March 1649 the parliamentary visitors elected him perpetual fellow of New College, Oxford. He matriculated in November 1650, graduating BCL in October 1654 and proceeding DCL in May 1661. 
At Oxford, Sharrock was one of those active around the university's botanic garden and in the circle of scientifically minded people who met in the Oxford lodgings of the Hon. Robert Boyle. These meetings, which preceded the foundation of the Royal Society in 1662, included several who went on to be its founding fellows, their discussions embracing chemistry, physics, and medicine. By 1660, when his own illness and an outbreak of smallpox in the university drove him to the family home at Adstock, and Boyle was living in London, Sharrock was overseeing Boyle's publications through the press at Oxford; as he wrote to Boyle on 9 April: 'I shall willingly promise that except only some studies altogether necessary for mee, wch will not take up one halfe of my studyeing time, I shall doe no other business but yours in this overlooking of Copy, the Presse, and rendering from Latine. (RS, Boyle letters, 5, no. 88)' This referred to Boyle's 'New Experiments Physico-Mechanical', written by Boyle in English, which Sharrock and his junior helpers were translating into Latin for simultaneous publication in both languages. In December Sharrock's father settled on him the rent of a small property in Northampton, to augment his fellowship, as he had given up a bursarship and tutorships 'in change for study whch is a better employment' (ibid., 5, no. 92), and in the hope that this income would equal the cost of maintaining his laboratory, where from time to time he copied experiments described by Boyle. He also contributed prefaces for Boyle's other treatises which were issued during this period. 
At the same time, with Boyle's encouragement, Sharrock had been writing his own book, 'The History of the Propagation and Improvement of Vegetables', published in Oxford, probably with Boyle's financial assistance, in 1660, with later editions in 1666 and 1672. 'Written according to observations made from Experience and Practice' (title-page) and intended as a practical text for husbandmen and gardeners, it included some perceptive remarks on the germination of seeds, on the external morphology of seedlings, and on the different ways of propagating, by offshoots, layering, grafting, and the taking of cuttings. Sharrock mused on the similarity of some plant forms and their possible relationship, and on the mathematical symmetry in the arrangement of bud and leaf, and the possibility of finding some natural law which controlled their growth: 'even in the wayes of Propagation that are most artificial, there is more of Nature than of Art... it is the great Art of Man to find out the Arts of Nature' (p. 4). 
While still at Oxford, Sharrock also published 'De officiis secundum naturae jus' (1660), a hypothesis of the law of nature (a concept derived from classical Greece), in which he contested Hobbes's views of ethics and politics, and 'Judicia (seu legum censurae) de variis incontinentiae speciebus' (1662), with definitions and penalties for adultery, polygamy, fornication, rape, sins against nature, and incest. In 1663 and 1664 he published his edition of William Lyndwood's influential 'Provinciale vetus provinciae Cantuariensis', a collection of constitutions and statutes of the archbishops of Canterbury from 1222 to 1415, compiled between 1422 and 1434, to which had been added in the early sixteenth century the contributions of the cardinal legates Otto and Ottobuono. 
In the summer of 1665 Sharrock took up the rectory of Great Horwood, Buckinghamshire, and later in that year he was installed prebendary of Winchester. In 1668 he exchanged Horwood for the rectory of East Woodhay, Hampshire, succeeding his younger brother Edmund (1635-1689), and about this time he married Frances (died 1692), daughter of Edmund West. Their daughters Anne ('bap'. 1669 or 1670) and Frances ('bap'. 1672) were followed by a son, Robert ('b'. 1677 or 1678, died 1708), who later entered the Inner Temple. Sharrock became rector of Bishop's Waltham, Hampshire, in 1669 and archdeacon of Winchester in April 1684. He maintained his interest in natural laws, publishing 'De finibus virtutis Christianae' (1673) and 'Royal Table of the Laws of Human Nature' (1682), which was an outline of his earlier 'Naturae jus'. Sharrock's books were recommended for the study of natural law in Oxford University, while 'Naturae jus' and 'Judicia' were reprinted on the continent in 1667 and 1668 respectively. Sharrock died on 11 July 1684, presumably at Bishop's Waltham, and was buried at Bishop's Waltham. His library passed to his son, who doubtless amplified it; at its sale on 11 February 1711 the Bibliotheca Sharrockiana consisted of more than 2000 volumes in several languages, encompassing divinity, history, natural sciences, medicine, and law. 


@@@@@


doc= 25244


Shaw, Alexander (1804-1890), surgeon, was born in Scotland on 6 February 1804, the sixth son of Charles Shaw, clerk of the county of Ayr, and Barbara Wright, his wife, daughter of a customs official at Greenock. John Shaw (1792-1827), Sir Charles Shaw (1795-1871), and Patrick Shaw were his elder brothers. One sister, Marion, married Sir Charles Bell, and another sister married Bell's brother, Professor George Joseph Bell. Alexander Shaw was educated at Edinburgh high school, and afterwards went to the University of Glasgow, where he matriculated in 1819 and graduated MA on 11 April 1822. Shaw was connected with the Middlesex Hospital, London, for more than half a century. He entered there as a pupil in 1822; was made assistant surgeon in 1836; and became surgeon in 1842. Sir Charles Bell lectured at the hospital between 1812 and 1836. On his retirement in 1872 Shaw was appointed consulting surgeon. He joined the medical school of the hospital on its formation, and at the time of his death he was the sole survivor of the original members of staff. With the idea of obtaining an MD degree, Shaw was admitted as a pensioner at Downing College, Cambridge, on 28 June 1826, but on the death of his brother John in 1827 he left Cambridge to take up his work at the Great Windmill Street School. From this time he devoted all his energies to his professional work, and he abandoned the idea of taking his Cambridge degree. He obtained the licence of the Society of Apothecaries in 1827, and in the following year gained membership of the Royal College of Surgeons. On the institution of the fellowship of the college, Shaw was elected one of the first fellows on 11 December 1843. He served on the college council from 1858 to 1865. 
Shaw took an active part in the work of the London medical societies. At the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society he served the offices of honorary secretary, vice-president, and treasurer, and in the 'Transactions' of that society he published some valuable papers on rickets. In 1839 he published 'A Narrative of the Discoveries of Sir Charles Bell in the Nervous System'. After Bell's death in 1842 Lady Bell lived with her brother, and their house became a centre for the literary and scientific society of the period. In 1856 Shaw married Susan, 'nee' Turner (died 1891), the widow of Mr J. Randall; they had a son who died in infancy. In 1869 Shaw republished Bell's 'New Idea of the Anatomy of the Brain' (originally published in a limited edition in 1811) with additions, consisting chiefly of selected passages bearing on the same subject and written by Bell before the publication of the 'New Idea' (see 'Journal of Anatomy and Physiology', 3, 1869, 147). Shaw also edited Bell's 'Anatomy and Philosophy of Expression' (3rd edn, 1844), to which he added a contribution on the nervous system, and 'The Hand' (6th edn, 1860). In his own right he published work on diseases of the spine. 
Shaw was a surgeon of repute, and, though incapacitated for work for some years before his death, he never lost interest in his profession. He died in London at his home, 136 Abbey Road, Kilburn, on 18 January 1890; his wife died the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 25245


Shaw, Sir Charles (1795-1871), army officer, third son of Charles Shaw, clerk of the county of Ayr, and his wife, Barbara Wright, daughter of a customs official at Greenock, was born at Ayr. Alexander Shaw (1804-1890), John Shaw (1792-1827), and Patrick Shaw (1796-1872) were his brothers. He was educated in Ayr, and at the universities of St Andrews and Edinburgh. He entered the army by purchase as ensign in the 52nd light infantry on 23 January 1813, and joined the 2nd battalion at Shorncliffe in March. From Shorncliffe, Shaw went to Hythe, and at the end of November he accompanied his regiment to Ramsgate, where they embarked for the Netherlands, landing at Tholen on 19 December. He was engaged in the capture of the village of Merxem, near Antwerp, on 31 January 1814, and, after serving through the campaign, was employed with his regiment in garrison duty at Antwerp. On the escape of Napoleon from Elba, Shaw was sent to Courtrai towards the end of March and to Ath in April, in the middle of which month he was drafted into the 1st battalion, commanded by Sir John Colborne. During the battle of Waterloo Shaw was on baggage-guard duty at Brussels. He took part in the subsequent march to and occupation of Paris. 
In March 1816 Shaw joined the 2nd battalion at Canterbury, and on its disbandment in July was placed on half pay. After six months in Scotland, he travelled in the Netherlands in 1817. In July he was brought back to full pay in the 90th light infantry. On obtaining leave of absence, he made a tour in the Hartz Mountains, and in September entered as a student in the military department of the Carolinum College at Brunswick to improve his qualifications for a military career. He left Brunswick in January 1818 for Berlin to see something of the Prussian army, and, after a tour in Prussia, joined the 90th at Plymouth on 10 March 1818. From Plymouth the regiment went to Chatham, and, on a reduction of the army taking place shortly after, Shaw was again placed on half pay. 
After attending a course of lectures at Edinburgh University, Shaw accepted an offer of partnership in an old-established wine business in Leith. He became captain and commander of the volunteer corps of Leith sharpshooters, and brought them to a high state of efficiency. On the disbandment of this corps Shaw was presented by its members, on 19 July 1822, with a handsome piece of plate. He established the first military club in Edinburgh, called the Caledonian United Service Club, for which he acted as honorary secretary until 1830. In that year, disliking commerce, he sold his business and travelled on the continent, returning to England in September 1831. 
In November 1831 Shaw was appointed captain of a light company of marines in the liberating army of Portugal against Dom Miguel, the heir to the throne. He embarked with recruits on 15 December, joined the fleet of Admiral George Sartorius at Belle Ile, arrived at the rendezvous at Terceira in the Azores towards the end of February 1832, and in May proceeded to Fayal and St Michael's. In June the expedition left the Azores for Portugal, and disembarked on the morning of 5 July at Mindella, about 10 miles from Porto, which city was entered the same afternoon, the Miguelites having evacuated it. 
Shaw, who in August 1832 was made a major of one of the battalions of British volunteers, saw much fighting around Porto, and was in every action and sortie during the siege of the city by Dom Miguel. He was twice wounded in the attack on his position on 29 September, when after a severe fight the Miguelites were repulsed. He was also severely wounded in the sortie of 17 November, and was subsequently made a knight of the Tower and Sword of Portugal. 
In 1833 Shaw commanded the Scottish contingent at Lordello, an outpost of the defences of Porto. In July 1833 he was appointed colonel and given the command of an English battalion, which he led in the repulse of Bourmont's attack on 25 July. At the end of September he embarked with his battalion for Lisbon, landing at Sao Martinho and marching from there to Torres Vedras to operate on the rear of the Miguelite army on its withdrawal from the attack on Lisbon. He and his battalion did much marching during the next eight months, but not much fighting. On 26 May 1834, two days after Shaw entered Estremez, the war ended. 
On 1 June 1834 Shaw marched to Lisbon in command of a brigade of 2500 men, which he there handed over to a Portuguese officer. From this time until February 1835 Shaw's time was mainly occupied in attempts to effect a financial settlement between the officers and men of the British contingent under his command and the Portuguese government in accordance with the terms of engagement, but he was only partially successful. He left Portugal in June 1835 and arrived at Falmouth on 12 July. 
On 17 July Shaw was gazetted a brigadier-general to command a Scottish brigade of the auxiliary legion then being raised in England by Sir George de Lacy Evans for service in Spain against the Carlists, and at once went to Glasgow to assist in raising recruits. He went to Spain in September 1835, landing on the 10th at Santander and marching with some 1600 men, whom he brought out with him, to Portugalete. Here he found that his rank would be only that of colonel in command of a small brigade of two regiments. In February 1836 he was given command of a brigade of three fine Irish regiments, but not the rank of brigadier-general. Until April 1836 he was quartered principally in Vitoria and the surrounding area. On 13 April his brigade embarked at Santander and arrived on the 24th at San Sebastian, which was besieged by Don Carlos. On 5 May an attack was made on the Carlist position on the heights above San Sebastian, and after a protracted fight the day was won. Shaw was struck by a spent ball, and another struck his watch. He was made a brigadier-general and decorated with the third class of the order of San Fernando. On 31 May Shaw skilfully repulsed an attack on his lines; at the end of August, owing to an unfortunate and avoidable quarrel with Evans, Shaw sent in his resignation, which Evans accepted with great regret at the loss of so gallant an officer. 
Shaw arrived in England at the end of September 1836, and for a time resided at Richmond, Surrey. In 1837 he published his rambling and egotistical 'Personal memoirs and correspondence... Comprising a narrative of the war for constitutional liberty in Portugal and in Spain from its commencement in 1831 to the dissolution of the British legion in 1837'. He was appointed in September 1839 chief commissioner of police at Manchester, a post that he held until September 1842. 
Shaw married, in 1841, Louisa Hannah, only daughter of Major Martin Curry of the 67th regiment; they had a son, Charles Martin, who, with his mother, survived Shaw. During the latter part of his life Shaw lived at Homburg-von-der-Hohe, where he died in February 1871 and was buried with military honours. 


@@@@@


doc= 25246


Shaw, Cuthbert (1738/9-1771), poet, was born at Ravensworth, near Richmond, Yorkshire, the son of Cuthbert Shaw ('bap'. 1711), shoemaker, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Neeson. After schooling at Kirby Hill and Scorton, both near Richmond, he became a school usher, first at Scorton, then at Darlington grammar school. At Scorton he was befriended by George Allan (1736-1800), the antiquary; at Darlington he published his first poem, 'Liberty' (1756), inscribed to Henry Vane, first earl of Darlington. The poem was thoroughly damned in the 'Monthly Review', 14 (1756), 575-6. 
Obliged to leave Darlington on account of some unspecified imprudence, Shaw found irregular work as an actor between 1758 and 1762 in Norwich, Ireland, and London. He also published 'Odes on the Four Seasons' under the pen-name W. Seymour at Bury St Edmunds (1760). His only stage success was a run of thirty-five performances as Sir George Wealthy in Samuel Foote's comedy 'The Minor' at the Haymarket from June 1760. His last appearance was at Covent Garden, as Pierre in Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' on 14 May 1762 for his own benefit. Then, 'partly losing his nose [from syphilis], he withdrew from the world, and employed himself wholly in a literary capacity' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 13.290). 
Shaw settled in Marylebone, Middlesex, and subsisted by writing paragraphs for newspapers and verse satires, the first of which, 'The Four Farthing-Candles' (1762), attacks Charles Churchill, Robert Lloyd, George Colman, and the dramatist William Shirley. His 'The Race' (1765), by 'Mercurius Spur', with mock pedantic notes by 'Faustinus Scriblerus', is a more substantial work; it is modelled on the booksellers' race in Pope's 'Dunciad' and attacks Smollett, Mallet, Murphy, and many lesser figures, though Churchill is now praised. Of Shaw's portrait of Johnson, quoted in Boswell's 'Life', Johnson reportedly said, 'the Author bore no ill-will, he has paid me a great compliment and I am obliged to him' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.480). A revised, enlarged edition of 'The Race' appeared in 1766. 
In May 1765 Shaw's neighbour in Marylebone, who kept a boarding-school attended by the fourth earl of Chesterfield's nine-year-old godson and heir, recommended Shaw as a man of sound classical learning who had been 'head-master to a great school' ('Letters', ed. Dobre, 2652). Consequently the boy was sent to Shaw for tuition: two hours each morning and evening for four months until William Dodd (another master of misrepresentation) became his tutor. On 5 November 1765 at St Mary's Church, Marylebone, Shaw married Ann Rivers, of a good family, against the wishes of her friends. Her early death in childbirth prompted Shaw's best-known poem, 'A Monody to the Memory of a Young Lady' (1768). This work brought him to the attention of George Lyttelton (author of a similarly affecting poem on the death of his own wife) and John Wilkes; the second edition (1769) was dedicated to Lyttelton. To the third edition (1770) was added 'An Evening Address to a Nightingale', Shaw's elegy on the three-year-old daughter whose birth had cost her mother's life. 
Meanwhile Shaw had involved himself in opposition politics. His verse satire 'Corruption', inscribed to Richard Grenville, Earl Temple, appeared in December 1768. In August 1769 he became editor of 'The Middlesex Journal, or, The Chronicle of Liberty', and asked Wilkes, who was then in prison, and other friends of freedom to write in its support (BL, Add. MS 30870, fol. 186). Later that year he was writing caustic political pieces in the pro-Wilkes 'Freeholder's Magazine, or, Monthly Chronicle of Liberty', where, in April and May 1770, also appeared long extracts from his unpublished poem 'Resignation'. He wrote an elegy on Charles Yorke, lord chancellor, who died on 20 January 1770, but Yorke's family paid to have it suppressed, perhaps because of Shaw's politics or bad character. 
Shaw suffered from poor health, dissipation, and poverty. Mention of the 'Theban drug' in the 'Monody' refers to his opium habit, and a letter to George Allan in 1769 tells of pawned property and 'the vast expense of physic and asses' milk which I am obliged constantly to use' (Longstaffe, 256n.). Near the end of his life his uncertain literary income was augmented by profits from his part-ownership, with Francis Newbery (1743-1818), of some patent medicines, including the once celebrated 'Beaume de vie', on the virtues of which he wrote an untraced 'Account'. This nostrum may be identical with one of the same name on sale a decade earlier in Paris and composed of aloes, gentian, rhubarb, myrrh, agaric, saffron, and zedoary, helped down by treacle, sugar, and proof spirit; it was said to restore and fortify the stomach. At least it was effective in making Shaw 'able to set up his equipage, house, servants, &c.' (ibid.). He had already distanced himself from his one-time acquaintance, and perhaps drinking companion, the poet Christopher Smart. 
Shaw died intestate, in debt, and, it was said, 'overwhelmed with complicated distress', on 1 September 1771 at his house in Titchfield Street, Oxford Market, London ('London Magazine', 1771, 472). In view of the profitability of patent medicines his own distress was probably due to mismanagement, but, as his patents had another fifty years to run, they perhaps enriched his next of kin (two uncles in Yorkshire) and their descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 25247


Shaw, Duncan (1727-1794), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Inverness, on 15 December 1727, the eldest of eight children of Lachlan Shaw (1686?-1777), Church of Scotland minister and historian, and his second wife, Anne Grant (died 1783). He was educated at Elgin Academy and at King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA in 1747 before studying divinity at Edinburgh University ('c'.1749- 'c'.1752). Shaw was licensed by the presbytery of Elgin on 14 November 1752, and was ordained minister of the parish of Rafford, Moray (10 May 1753). On 10 January 1754 he married Jean (died 1795), daughter of George Gordon, minister of Alves, with whom he had four daughters and three sons. Early in his long ministry in Rafford, Shaw assisted Alexander Adam with a letter of recommendation at the outset of a career which ended with the rectorship of the high school of Edinburgh. Shaw was later remembered as 'a man of cultivated mind, and of pleasing manners, possessing in no ordinary degree the affections of the people' ('New Statistical Account of Scotland', 245). In 1774 Shaw received the degree of DD from Marischal College, Aberdeen. He was translated and admitted to the third charge of St Nicholas's Church, Aberdeen, on 13 November 1783. In 1786 he served as moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. Described by Thomas Christie as 'a sensible and learned man' (Nichols, 4.823), Shaw published, in two volumes, 'A Comparative View of the Several Methods of Promoting Religious Instruction' (1776); 'The History and Philosophy of Judaism' (1787), designed in part as a refutation of David Hume's views; and 'The Centurion' (1793). He died on 23 June 1794 and was buried in St Nicholas's churchyard, Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 25248


Shaw, Sir Edmund (d. 1488), goldsmith and mayor of London, was the son of John Shaa of Dukinfield in Cheshire. He was apprenticed in 1450 to a London goldsmith, probably Robert Butler, and completed his apprenticeship in 1458. Shortly after, in early 1462, he received a life grant of the office of engraver to the Tower of London and other English and Calais mints, which he held for twenty years. A successful member of his craft, he seems to have been primarily a working goldsmith all his life, referring to his shop, warehouse, and working houses in his testament. There is no evidence that he traded regularly overseas, and the small number of debts for which he sued indicates that he probably did not often act as a moneylender or mortgagee. 
Like almost every other contemporary Londoner of note, however, Shaw lent money to Edward IV as part of an orchestrated loan in 1468, and subsequently he made several private loans, suggesting that his dealings with a fellow goldsmith, Hugh Brice, had brought him into closer association with the king. In addition to the craft connection between them, Brice had been appointed keeper of the Tower mint at about the same time as Shaw was made engraver, and in early 1469 Shaw was one of eight friends whom Brice persuaded to make further large loans to the king. Later that year Shaw lent $240 by himself, and he continued to have both financial and commercial dealings with Edward IV thereafter. 
According to Sir Thomas More (a biased source) Shaw was a proud and ambitious man. After two unsuccessful nominations for the London aldermanry, in September 1470 and June 1471, he was eventually elected alderman of Cripplegate ward in July 1473, and he became sheriff the following year. A member of the fraternity of St Giles, Cripplegate ward, he probably lived in that ward for most of his later life (as did his brother Ralph ['see below']). None the less in 1485 he transferred to Cheap ward on the death of Sir Thomas Hill, whose testament he supervised. In 1482, having been the unsuccessful mayoral candidate the previous year, Shaw was elected mayor, and was therefore serving both when Edward IV died and throughout the tumultuous period leading up to the usurpation of Richard III. 
It is for his role and assumed political attitude during this time that Shaw is mainly remembered. According to Sir Thomas More (writing in the years around 1515) and the sixteenth-century London chroniclers it was his brother 
Edmund Shaw died on 20 April 1488. One of his executors was his 'cousin' John Shaw, also a goldsmith and a future mayor of London; another was his 'right especiall and tender loving Frende', Henry VII's close adviser Sir Reynold Bray (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/8/12). Shaw was buried in the mercers' chapel, St Thomas of Acon, but left numerous legacies both to his parish church, St Peter's, Westcheap, and to the inhabitants of Cripplegate ward, including a sum for the rebuilding of Cripplegate itself. Another legacy was intended to establish a grammar school in Stockport, Cheshire, where his parents were buried. Among those for whom he made arrangements for prayers to be said were Edward IV, Edward's sister Anne, duchess of Exeter, and Lord Herbert. Shaw held Essex properties worth over $50 per annum at his death, equating to a purchase price of perhaps $750-$1000, and bequeathed over $4000 in cash and plate as well as personal and household effects. He was survived by his wife, Juliana, a son, Hugh, who died childless a few years later, daughters Margaret (married to a mercer, Thomas Rich) and Katherine (who later married William Brown, another mercer), as well as four sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 25249


Shaw, Sir Frederick, third baronet (1799-1876), politician, born at Bushy Park, co. Dublin, on 11 December 1799, was the second son of Sir Robert Shaw (1774-1849), and his first wife, Maria (died 1831), daughter and heir of Abraham Wilkinson of Bushy Park. The father, a Dublin banker, sat in the Irish parliament (1798-1800) for Bannow borough, co. Wexford; after voting against the union he was for twenty-two years (1804-26) member for Dublin city in the Westminster parliament. He also served as lord mayor of Dublin, and was created a baronet in 1821. 
Shaw entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1816, but shortly afterwards moved to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1819. In 1822 he was called to the Irish bar and quickly attained a considerable practice. In 1826 he was appointed recorder of Dundalk, an office that he vacated two years later on his nomination to the recordership of Dublin. Shaw married, on 16 March 1819, Thomasine Emily (died 1859), sixth daughter of the Hon. George Jocelyn, and granddaughter of Robert, first earl of Roden; they had five sons and three daughters. 
His father's influence, combined with his own abilities, soon led to Shaw's selection as one of the tory candidates for the representation of Dublin. In 1830 he successfully contested the city, defeating Henry Grattan's son. At the general election of 1831 he was unsuccessful, but was awarded the seat on petition, and held it for the brief remainder of the unreformed parliament. Each of his elections for the unreformed constituency of Dublin cost him $10,000. After the 'Reform Act', O'Connell had hopes that Shaw might be persuaded to stand as a conservative repealer, but was soon disabused of this notion. At the election of 1832, Shaw was returned with Serjeant Lefroy for the University of Dublin; he was subsequently re-elected four times for the same constituency. 
In the House of Commons Shaw rapidly acquired a reputation. He possessed debating talents of a high order, and became the recognized leader of the Irish Conservatives. He was regarded as the most capable opponent of O'Connell, though he did not take the extreme tory view of any question, and had been a supporter of Catholic emancipation before that measure was passed. His moderation was unrepresentative of the Irish tory rank and file, and distanced him from the Lords' leaders Roden and Enniskillen. His most considerable parliamentary achievement was in the debate on the charges brought by O'Connell against Sir William Cusack Smith, an Irish judge. O'Connell had on 13 February 1834 carried by a majority of ninety-three a motion for the appointment of a select committee to inquire into the conduct of Baron Smith in introducing political topics in his judicial charges. A week later a motion to rescind this resolution was carried, notwithstanding ministerial opposition, as a result mainly of Shaw's eloquent defence of the accused judge. 
When Peel formed his government in 1834, Shaw declined on professional grounds all preferment beyond a seat in the Irish privy council. During this short administration he was, however, the chief adviser of Lord Haddington's Irish government, which was called by opponents the 'Shaw viceroyalty'. On the return of the whigs to office, Shaw became one of Peel's most active colleagues in opposition. He took an active but not extreme part in the opposition to Lord John Russell's 'Irish Municipal Corporations Bill' of 1835, and proposed a successful amendment to the 1838 'Tithe Bill'. He favoured an extensive poor-relief measure. Although he had entered parliament as a representative of Conservative and protestant principles, Shaw's opinion and conduct had by 1847 become too liberal for some of his old supporters, particularly after he followed Peel in voting for repeal of the corn laws in 1846. At the elections of 1847 he retained his seat for the university only after a very severe contest with Sir Joseph Napier, later Irish lord chancellor. 
In 1848 poor health obliged Shaw to resign his seat and retire from political life. On the death, unmarried, of his elder brother, Robert, on 19 February 1869, he succeeded to the baronetcy. Early in 1876 he resigned his office of recorder of Dublin, receiving an address from the bar. He had been made a bencher of the King's Inns in 1835. He died on 30 June 1876 at his home, Terenure Manor (formerly known as Kimmage House), Crumlin, co. Dublin, and was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25250


Shaw, George (1751-1813), natural historian, was born on 10 December 1751 at Bierton, Buckinghamshire, the younger of two sons of the Revd Timothy Shaw, vicar of Bierton. He was educated at home by his father until 1765, with a strong interest in natural history, then entered Magdalen Hall, Oxford, graduating BA on 24 May 1769, and MA three years later. He was ordained deacon in 1774 to assist his father. His continuing interest in natural history led him after a few years to abandon the church as a profession and to study medicine in Edinburgh, then at its peak as a centre for natural history and medical education. On his return to Oxford he was appointed deputy botanical lecturer. On 17 October 1787 he was admitted to the degrees of bachelor and doctor of medicine. He was unable to succeed to the botany professorship because of the conditions of its establishment, so left for London to make a career in medical practice. He rapidly became a member of the group of naturalists led by James Edward Smith, and joined with them in founding the Linnean Society in 1788. Six years later he was elected its vice-president. 
Shaw was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1789. In 1791 he was appointed assistant keeper of the natural history section of the British Museum, and was promoted to keeper in 1807. He was responsible for organizing its collections at a time when budgetary limitations and lack of space led to their continuing deterioration. His annual burnings of those which time, insects, and rot were destroying became part of the folklore of the museum's early history. He retained the post until his death. 
Shaw had a tenacious memory, wrote Latin with facility, elegance, and purity, and sometimes lapsed into poetry. He delivered a series of twelve popular lectures on zoology at the Royal Institution in 1806 and 1807 (published in 1809). He was an indefatigable worker, and in his 'Philosophical Transactions Abridged' (18 vols., 1809) dealt with all the papers on natural history, nearly 1500 in number, inserting the Linnaean names of the species and adding references to later works. 
Shaw was more a popularizer than a naturalist. Subscribing to the Linnaean method of classification, he brought to the attention of an expanding lay audience for natural history the more remarkable novelties not only in such collections as the Leverian Museum, with which he had a working association, but also from the recently settled Australia with which he became familiar as the editor of the natural history appendix to J. White's 'Journal of a Voyage to New South Wales' (1790); in the latter he provided the first systematic description of the natural wonders of the new continent. His most important contribution to natural history was his 'Naturalist's Miscellany' whose twenty-four volumes from 1789 until his death in 1813 consisted of a monthly series of coloured illustrations and Latin and English classificatory descriptions of the more interesting botanical and zoological novelties, such as the remarkable black swan and the egg-laying mammalian spiny anteater (echidna) and the duck-billed platypus. The materials of the 'Miscellany' served as the basis for the multi-volumed 'General Zoology', begun in 1800 but left unfinished at his death. His publications were well illustrated, providing for the non-professional naturalist the description of rare specimens available in the original only to the wealthiest collector or museum. Shaw died at his residence in the British Museum on 22 July 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 25251


Shaw, Henry (1800-1873), antiquary and illuminator, was born in London on 4 July 1800; nothing is known of his family or education. A precocious architectural draughtsman, he published details of ornament from English medieval churches in 1823 ('A Series of Details of Gothic Architecture') and supplied John Britton with drawings of Wells Cathedral for plates dated 1824 and 1825 included in the fourth volume of 'Cathedral Antiquities', eventually published as a series in 1836; Shaw's view of the interior was remembered as 'one of the best plates' (Britton, 2.134). He contributed to a number of de luxe publications promoted by antiquarian enthusiasts, among them 'The History and Antiquities of the Chapel at Luton Park, a Seat of the... Marquess of Bute' (1829-30), 'The history and illustrations of a house in the Elizabethan style of architecture, the property of John Danby Palmer' (1838), Thomas Alcock Beck's 'A Description of Furness Abbey' (1845), and, most impressively, William Sidney Gibson's 'History of the Monastery Founded at Tynemouth' (1846-7). 
Shaw marketed prints from these publications from at least June 1830. His prints of details of illuminated manuscripts, artefacts, and ornament of the middle ages and later periods were published by William Pickering. Sets of prints were published as books, the first as 'Illuminated ornaments selected from manuscripts and early printed books from the sixth to the seventeenth centuries' (1833), with an introduction by Frederic Madden. A similar publishing formula was adopted for other categories of artefact: works on Elizabethan architectural decoration appeared in 1834-5, on medieval furniture in 1836, on ornamental metalwork in 1836, on dresses and decorations of the middle ages in 1843, on alphabets in 1843, and on the medieval decorative arts in general in 1850. Plates were engraved for Shaw and mostly finished with hand-colouring, for which he employed assistants, especially after about 1840. Shaw designed initial letters based on medieval forms that were used in the printing trade. He provided initials and ornament for the prestigious 'New Testament' published by Longman in 1864 with engravings of works by artists from Fra Angelico to Raphael. 
Shaw was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1833. His reproductions of medieval and Renaissance artefacts and manuscripts established standards of finish, colour, and form that the originals themselves had to match to satisfy Victorian taste. By 1845 he had assistants making facsimiles in the British Museum Library under his supervision for sale. John Ruskin was among his customers. In 1866 he organized an exhibition of illuminated drawings, facsimiles of famous illuminated manuscripts dating from the ninth to the sixteenth centuries; the works were sold at Christies on 6 June of that year, prices ranging from $4 to over $90. The South Kensington Museum ordered further copies of works in this sale for its own collections. A review of Shaw's 'Handbook of the Art of Illumination' (1866) described him as 'an authority on a peculiar and most beautiful department of the Arts of the Middle Ages' ('Art Journal', 28, 1866, 342), one of a group who had brought this art to the attention of the educated public. Shaw justified use of wood-engravings in his 'Handbook' by its cheapness: he had employed chromolithography in earlier publications, but considered hand-colouring alone capable of faithful reproduction. He is reported to have supplied to order illuminated addresses, documents produced for ceremonial purposes that from the 1860s were offered to honoured persons on public occasions, to celebrate coming of age, marriage, retirement, or official visits. 
Shaw's mission was educational as well as antiquarian. His 'Encyclopedia of Ornament' (1842) aimed to provide models for 'artist or manufacturer' and to encourage 'enlargement of correct taste'. Though lacking a theoretical or systematic approach, this was a precursor of Owen Jones's 'Grammar of Ornament' (1856), a work that underpinned the national system of design education elaborated by Henry Cole and the South Kensington Museum. In the 'Catalogue of the Museum of Medieval Art Collected by the Late L. N. Cottingham, FSA, Architect' (1850), Shaw expressed the hope that the government might acquire Cottingham's copies either for the School of Design or as the nucleus of a national and medieval museum as a means of improving the education of workmen and designers. The catalogue of his 1866 exhibition states that, 'for purposes of instruction, [facsimiles of illuminated manuscripts]... may... be considered more satisfactory than the original drawings' ('Catalogue of Illuminated Drawings', 3-4), a point he made to the South Kensington Museum in 1864 when asked to evaluate its collection of 'illuminations'. 
Shaw died on 12 June 1873 at Broxbourne, Hertfordshire. The executors of his will were Alfred Maples Jeaffreson and Edward Warren, the son of his niece and an assistant at the British Museum respectively. The estate was valued at nearly $3000, the chief beneficiaries being Shaw's nieces Mary Warren, Eliza Westropp, Louisa Gray Compton, and Blanche Jeaffreson (the wife of Alfred Jeaffreson and the youngest daughter of Louisa Compton). 


@@@@@


doc= 25252


Shaw, Sir James, first baronet (1764-1843), lord mayor of London, son of John Shaw, an Ayrshire farmer, whose ancestors had occupied the property of Mosshead for three centuries, and of Helen, daughter of David Sellars of the Mains, Craigie, Ayrshire, was born at Mosshead in the parish of Riccarton on 26 August 1764. On his father's death, about five years later, the family moved to Kilmarnock, where James Shaw was educated at the grammar school. When seventeen years old he went to America to join his brother David, who held a position in the commissariat service, and by his influence was placed in the commercial house of Messrs George and Samuel Douglass at New York. Three years later he returned to Britain, and was made a junior member of the firm in London, eventually becoming a full partner. In 1798 he was elected alderman for the ward of Portsoken, in 1803 became sheriff of London and Middlesex, and was lord mayor in 1805-6. He distinguished himself in this office by reviving the right of the city to precedence on public occasions, and exercised his privilege at the funeral of Lord Nelson, when many of the royal family took part in the procession. 
From 1806 to 1818 Shaw was MP for the City of London, normally supporting the government, though after 1815 he took a more independent line. He sought and obtained a baronetcy in 1809 from the duke of Portland and continued an alderman until 1831, when he was elected chamberlain of London. In this position he was threatened with a serious misfortune. He inadvertently invested $40,000 held by him as banker to the corporation in the spurious exchequer bills with which the market at that time was flooded. On discovering his error he made immediate preparations to sacrifice almost his entire private fortune to make good the loss. A government commission, however, completely exonerated him, and he was repaid the full amount. In May 1843 he resigned the office of chamberlain, and on 22 October of the same year he died, unmarried, at his house in America Square. 
Shaw was known for his energy as a patron. Among other kindnesses he succeeded in procuring a provision for the widow of Robert Burns and commissions for her sons. In 1848 a statue of him, by Fillans, was erected at the Kilmarnock Cross; and a portrait by James Tannock was presented to the borough. The baronetcy, by a special patent granted in 1813, descended to his sister's son, John MacGee, who took the name of Shaw. On his death, childless, in November 1868, it became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 25253


Shaw, John (1558/9-1625), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born in Westmorland and attended school there. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 17 November 1581, aged twenty-two, and graduated BA on 29 February 1584. He was instituted vicar of Woking, Surrey, on 11 September 1588. He probably married soon afterwards, but his wife's name is unknown. Their son Tobias was born in 1589 or 1590: he matriculated from Queen's College on 6 July 1604, aged fourteen. Shaw was deprived in 1596 for nonconformity, but appears to have been reinstituted, probably by the time of Tobias's matriculation. His book 'The Blessedness of Marie, the Mother of Jesus' (1618) contains a preface to Lady Dorothy Zouch, wife of Sir Edward Zouch, at Woking, which celebrates her 'coming in among us', her 'hearty love to true religion', and her 'comfort in the ministry and public worship of God established'; a distich in the church, now destroyed, likewise suggests that Shaw had been received back into the ministry. His 'Bibliorum summula' (1621) was also signed from Woking. According to its translator, Simon Wastell, who had been at school with Shaw, this work was 'much applauded of the godly learned ministers and of many other scholars' (Wastell, 2nd preface). Among the commendatory verses prefixed to the original book was one by Daniel Featley of Lambeth. Shaw lived at Woking until his death in 1625, and was buried there on 15 September. Tobias, who had graduated BA in 1611 and proceeded MA in 1614, became rector of Blendworth, Hampshire, in 1619. 


@@@@@


doc= 25254


Shawe, John (1608-1672), nonconformist minister, was born on 22 June 1608 at Sykehouse in the parish of Bradfield, Yorkshire, the only son of John Shawe (died 1634) and his second wife, Emote Steade (died 1652). He went to school at Darwen and Rotherham and in 1623 entered Christ's College, Cambridge, where he was tutored by William Chappell, later bishop of Cork. As a result of hearing sermons in a nearby village preached by Thomas Weld, Shawe determined on a ministerial career and was ordained priest at Peterborough on 28 December 1629, taking his MA degree the following year. He was appointed lecturer at Brampton in Derbyshire in 1630 and given a licence by the bishop, Thomas Morton, to preach throughout the diocese without being required to subscribe to the Articles. While there Shawe married Dorothy (died 1657), daughter of George Heathcote, gentleman, of Cutthorpe Hall, Brampton, on 10 December 1632 in the church of Holy Trinity, Micklegate, in York, a city in whose religious life he was later to play a prominent part. More immediately, however, Shawe was invited by the feoffees of impropriations to a lectureship at Chulmleigh in Devon for a period of three years, having been heard preaching in London by a group of merchants with connections to Devon. He moved there in 1633, by which time he had also been appointed chaplain to Philip Herbert, earl of Montgomery and Pembroke. His ministry at Chulmleigh was brought to an end in 1636 as a result of complaints against his churchmanship, probably instigated by Archbishop Laud. Shawe then withdrew to his estate at Sykehouse (his father having died in 1634) but was soon called to be one of the civic preachers at York by the puritan mayor, Alderman Vaux. He took up his post at All Saints, Pavement, but immediately fell foul of Archbishop Neile as a result of his first sermon in the city. Neile thought him the leader of the puritan party at York but refrained from further action against him when he discovered that Shawe was Pembroke's chaplain. For the next three years Shawe played a prominent role, along with Edward Bowles, in the religious life of the city. 
On 17 April 1639 Shawe was instituted to the valuable living of Rotherham, Yorkshire, on Pembroke's presentation, and soon after accompanied him and the royal entourage to the siege of Berwick. While there he established a friendship with Alexander Henderson, which was renewed the following year when Shawe was chaplain to the English commissioners appointed to settle the grievances of the Scots, whom Henderson represented as a commissioner. Shawe's involvement with Scottish affairs at this time continued through his work as chaplain to Henry Rich, earl of Holland, and he also retained close links with the city of York, preaching a sermon critical of the king in one of the parish churches on the occasion of the royal arrival there in the spring of 1642. 
After the king left York, Shawe moved to Hull, but was excluded by the governor, Sir John Hotham, as a result of his first sermon in the town. He then withdrew to Beverley where he preached a sermon, dedicated to the mayor and aldermen of Hull, and published as 'A Broken Heart', in which he defended his actions and likened the cause of the royalist armies to that of the northern earls of 1569. After returning to Rotherham, Shawe was asked to preach before Lord Fairfax and his army, then camped at Selby, on a special fast day called for 5 February 1643, a sermon subsequently published as 'Two Clean Birds'. He was not long at Rotherham; apparently on account of his support for parliament, with three other leading townsmen, he was fined $1000; although his wife was made prisoner when the town was taken on 4 May 1643, Shawe escaped to Manchester. There he joined other puritan ministers in providing regular sermons, preaching every Friday in the town, continuing to live there after he accepted the rectory of nearby Lyme from Sir William Brereton later that year. In the spring of 1644 Shawe was invited to make a two-month missionary visit to Cartmel, Lancashire, where puritan preaching had been little heard before, and this experience of unreformed religion made a strong impression on him. In June 1644, on hearing of the arrival of Prince Rupert and his forces, he was once again on his travels, back across the Pennines this time, and he re-emerged in York immediately after the relief of the city and the parliamentarian victory at Marston Moor. He was appointed chaplain to the standing committee for the government of the northern counties on 16 July 1644 and on 20 September preached the sermon in York Minster on the occasion of the taking of the solemn league and covenant by Fairfax and others. 
Throughout the upheavals of the 1640s and in subsequent years, Shawe remained firm in his commitment to a presbyterian form of church order (although he was not over-zealous in this respect) and influenced the religious policy of the interregnum both locally and nationally. He became secretary to the committee for scandalous ministers and was appointed to the wealthy living of Scrayingham by Fairfax. In 1645 he accepted an invitation to return to Hull, first as lecturer at St Mary's and later at the main church of Holy Trinity, and he remained in these posts until the Restoration. In addition, in 1651, after some litigation with the then incumbent, Shawe was made master of the Hull Charterhouse; he thereafter made this his home, spending considerable sums on the property both for his benefit and that of the poor inmates. Shawe preached in the town on Wednesdays and Thursdays and set up a godly discipline for the administration of the Lord's supper on presbyterian lines, which did not find favour among all members of the corporation, including some congregationalists. Relations with the corporation were also often strained over disputes about salary and the administration of the Charterhouse. During these years he played an active role on a wider stage; he was chaplain to the parliamentary commissioners negotiating with the king at Newcastle in 1646 and under the protectorate he preached often at both Whitehall and Hampton Court, receiving a pension of $100 per annum from Cromwell. 
Shawe's first wife, Dorothy, died on 10 December 1657, and he published a memoir of her life the following year. On 19 December 1659 he married Margaret (died 1693), daughter of John Stillington, esquire, of Kelfield, and it was for his young son of that marriage that Shawe subsequently wrote his autobiography. Despite his high profile under the protectorate, on 25 July 1660 he was appointed a royal chaplain. He was present at the coronation the following April, but by the end of 1660 his position at Hull was under threat from the officers of the garrison there. On 9 June 1661 a royal mandate inhibited him from preaching at Holy Trinity but, after a personal interview with the king, Shawe was allowed to retain the Charterhouse and his position as a royal chaplain. Although he initially returned to Hull, preaching at the Charterhouse to considerable crowds despite the opposition of the garrison, following the 'Act of Uniformity' he resigned his post there, returning to Rotherham on 20 June 1662. During that summer he shared the pulpit at Rotherham with the vicar, but after St Bartholomew's day, and for the remainder of his life, preached only in private houses. He died on 19 April 1672, and was buried at Rotherham two days later. Despite his conflicts with Hull corporation over salary he had remained comfortably off, providing substantial marriage portions for his six daughters and leaving lands in Penistone. By his will he bequeathed sixty bibles to be distributed to the poor, as well as other charitable bequests to Hull and elsewhere. His reputation for learning was recalled in the funeral inscription formerly in Rotherham parish which described him as a Barnabas or Boarnerges. 


@@@@@


doc= 25255


Shaw, John (1612/13-1689), Church of England clergyman, was born at Bedlington, co. Durham, the son of a clergyman, probably of John Shaw (died 1637), curate of St John's, Newcastle upon Tyne, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1621). Shaw was educated by Thomas Ingmethorp, the rector of Great Stainton, Durham, before he matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 21 November 1628, aged fifteen. He moved to Brasenose College on 2 April 1629, where he graduated BA on 24 March 1632. Returning to the north he was vicar of Alnham, Northumberland, from 1636, and appointed afternoon lecturer at All Saints, Newcastle, in December 1643. Ejected from both these posts by the Scots he was instituted rector of Whalton, Northumberland, in 1645. Unlike his parliamentarian namesake the vicar of Rotherham (with whom he has been confused), John Shaw was a royalist sympathizer, for which he was prevented from taking up his living at Whalton, and was allegedly imprisoned for four years. In the 1650s he settled in the poorer living of Bolton in Craven, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, which yielded him $50 per annum. In 1652 he wrote 'The pourtraicture of the primitive saints in their actings and sufferings, according to St Paul's canon'. 
In 1661 Shaw recovered the rectory of Whalton and he replaced the ejected presbyterian, Henry Lever, as lecturer at St John's Church, Newcastle, on 27 August 1662. Appointed to preach forenoon and afternoon sermons at St John's for $60 per annum he was also paid $10 per annum for his Thursday lecture at St Nicholas's Church, Newcastle. He was active suppressing Newcastle's dissenters, and personally broke open the doors of the conventicle at Richard Gilpin's house on 22 July 1669. About 1661, and again in 1679, he was chosen as a member of convocation for Yorkshire, and he also served as 'procurator cleri' for the archdeaconry of Northumberland. In 1677 he wrote 'Origo protestantium, or, An answer to a popish manuscript... wherein protestancy is demonstrated to be elder than popery'. 
The corporation of Newcastle published some of Shaw's writings against popery at its own expense, but his work of 1685, entitled 'No reformation of the established Reformation', condemned Roman Catholics and dissenters alike with equal vehemence for undermining the church. He was 'a strict observer of the orders of the church' and 'somewhat warm in his temper' ('Ambrose Barnes', 436). After suffering for several years with gout he died on 22 May 1689, 'a loyal, religious and learned Person' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.832), and was buried just before the altar in St John's Church, Newcastle. His monumental inscription, written by his son, reads 'Deo, ecclesiae, patriae, regi, pie fidelis' ('religiously loyal to God, church, country, king'; 'Ambrose Barnes', 436). 


@@@@@


doc= 25256


Shaw, John (1789-1815), pugilist and soldier, was born on a farm between the villages of Cossall and Wollaton in Nottinghamshire, the son of William Shaw, farmer. Educated at Trowell Moor school, he was a delicate child, but grew to be a powerfully built young man. After being apprenticed to a wheelwright in Radford, Nottinghamshire, in 1802, he then became a carpenter at Wollaton Hall, home of Lord Middleton. He achieved fame as a boxer, and fought one match at which Jem Belcher, the veteran prize-fighter, was present, before enlisting in the 2nd Life Guards at Nottingham goose fair on 16 October 1807. Shaw showed particular aptitude as a soldier and gained a certain notoriety in his regiment by engaging in a street brawl near Portman Square, London, in which he defeated three toughs who taunted him for his red coat. After subsequently being introduced by his officers to the prize-fighting elite at the fives court in Little St Martin Lane, London, and to Jackson's Rooms, a fashionable club and boxing school in Bond Street, Shaw fought and defeated James Molyneaux, the American boxer, in a 'friendly' match (with gloves). Soon afterwards he outpaced and beat Captain Robert Barclay of the 23rd regiment, known for his devastating punches. 
Jack Shaw's reputation as a fighter was established, despite a defeat by Tom Belcher, brother of Jem, and in July 1812 he outfought a Mr Burrows in his first bare-knuckle contest, in which he forced his opponent to retire in less than seventeen minutes. In April 1815, having issued a challenge to all England, he was matched against Ned Painter, whose second was the famed boxer Tom Cribb, on Hounslow Heath and beat his opponent ruthlessly with ten successive knock-down blows in twenty-eight minutes. Shaw apparently intended to challenge Cribb for the England championship title but before this happened the 2nd Life Guards were ordered to join Wellington's army in the south Netherlands as the crisis deepened following Napoleon's escape from Elba. 
Now a corporal, Shaw was in charge of a foraging party early in the morning of 18 June 1815, when his troop was recalled to take its place with the regiment on the slopes above La Haye-Sainte at Waterloo. He took a conspicuous part in the numerous charges the 2nd Life Guards made that day as a part of the household brigade under Lord Edward Somerset, and was seen powerfully striking with his sword, causing terrible carnage among the French cavalrymen with whom he engaged. His energy and bravery were of the highest order, although reports that he captured a French eagle standard are contradictory and may be an exaggeration. Tom Morris of the 73rd regiment, who watched Shaw in action, noted that he had been drinking gin before the action began, and felt that he would have done better to attend more closely to the ordering of his troop. At last, venturing forward to the aid of Captain Edward Kelly of his regiment, Shaw was isolated from his comrades by French cuirassiers and his sword broke in his hand. Striking fiercely about him with his helmet, he was eventually unhorsed and cut down by his opponents, receiving numerous wounds. Shaw was seen later that night, lying dreadfully injured on a midden near La Haye-Sainte, and in the morning his lifeless body was buried nearby; Sergeant-Major Edward Cotton, later proprietor of the Waterloo Museum, was one of the burial party. 
Shaw's body was later exhumed and returned to Britain at the instigation of Sir Walter Scott, who had met him in the studio of the artist Benjamin Haydon, where Shaw posed as a model. A cast of his skull is in the Household Cavalry Museum in Windsor. Jack Shaw was a tall man, said to be 6 feet 1/2 inch tall and weighing 15 stone on entering the army. Noted for his very powerful physique and great strength, he was a brave and pugnacious boxer, and a skilful rider and swordsman. Although his fame faded after Waterloo, a memorial to those men of the village of Cossall who fought in the battle, including Shaw, was erected in 1877 in the parish churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 25257


Shaw, John (1792-1827), surgeon and anatomist, born, probably in Ayr, on 2 April 1792, was the son of Charles Shaw, clerk of the county of Ayr, and his wife, Barbara Wright, daughter of a customs official at Greenock; he was the grandson of David Shaw, moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1775. His three brothers were the legal writer Patrick Shaw, the surgeon and anatomist Alexander Shaw (1804-1890), and the soldier Sir Charles Shaw (1795-1871). One of his sisters, Marion, married Charles Bell; Shaw apparently lived with them after their marriage in 1811 until his death. Shaw's other sister, Barbara, married Charles Bell's brother, the eminent advocate George Joseph Bell. 
Shaw was sent to London at the age of fifteen to study anatomy and surgery with Charles Bell at the Great Windmill Street School. As an anatomist Shaw is said to have made important additions to the school's collection of anatomical specimens. He was surgeon to the Middlesex Hospital from 1825 until his death in 1827. He published two surgical works concerned with distortions of the spine and chest; both works were published in the 1820s not only in England but also in Weimar, in German translation. Shaw's work as a demonstrator at the Great Windmill Street School led to his 'Manual for the Student of Anatomy' (1821), which was republished twice in London in 1822 and published in German translation in Weimar in 1823. It was also published in the United States. 
Shaw and his brother Alexander were drawn into the campaign carried out by their brother-in-law, Charles Bell, in support of Bell's claim that he had preceded Francois Magendie in the discovery that the roots of the spinal nerves differ in their functions, one being concerned with sensation and the other with motion. Facsimile reproductions of some of the contributions by Bell and by the Shaws to that priority dispute are found in P. F. Cranefield's 'The Way In and the Way Out' (1974). The latter also includes a facsimile reproduction of an article by A. D. Waller, published in 'Science Progress' in 1911, in which Waller refers to the claim that Bell was greater than William Harvey as a 'family compact'. Shaw had extensive family connections to important and successful persons; it seems likely that both he and his brother were not only willing to join in a 'family compact' but were possibly anxious to secure a place in history for themselves and Charles Bell. 
Shaw accomplished a great deal in his short life and the republication of his books in Germany and the United States shows that he had a good reputation in his day. Nevertheless, he is now remembered more for his connection with the Bell-Magendie controversy than for any major contribution to anatomy, physiology, or surgery. Shaw died at home, in London, on 19 July 1827, apparently from scarlet fever. 


@@@@@


doc= 25258


Shaw, John (1776-1832), architect, was born on 10 March 1776 at Bexley, Kent, the son of John Shaw and his wife, Elizabeth. He was apprenticed for seven years to George Gwilt the elder in 1790, and began to practise independently in 1798. With his wife, Elizabeth Hester Whitfield ('bap'. 1776, died 1864), who was the daughter of his uncle Francis Whitfield and his wife, Elizabeth, Shaw had seven sons and two daughters. The eldest son was John Shaw junior ['see below']; the seventh son was Thomas Budd Shaw. 
From 1799 until 1831 Shaw was a regular exhibitor at the Royal Academy. In 1803, following his appointment to the post of surveyor of the Eyre estate in St John's Wood, he exhibited at the academy ambitious plans for a 'British circus' consisting of detached and semi-detached houses arranged in two circles on either side of a circular road. Although not the originator of this scheme, which was not carried into effect, Shaw and his eldest son were to become pioneers in the development of semi-detached houses in irregularly designed roads, as opposed to grid-plan terraced streets. In 1816 he was appointed architect and surveyor of Christ's Hospital school in Newgate Street, London, to which he made extensive additions: between 1820 and 1822 he built the infirmary; the west side of the quadrangle followed between 1825 and 1829, and the mathematics and grammar schools in 1832. These were built in the Gothic style, which Shaw later used to sympathetic effect in his additions to Newstead Abbey, Linby, Nottinghamshire (1818- 'c'.1830), for Colonel Wildman, who had purchased the abbey from Lord Byron. Other examples of his work in this style are the church of St Dunstan, Fleet Street (1831-3; eventually completed by his son), and Ilam Hall, Staffordshire (1821-6). 
Shaw made extensive valuations of property in London, and was architect to the Phoenix Fire Assurance Company. In addition to the projects mentioned above, he built many country houses, including Blendon Hall, Kent ('c'.1815; destr. 1834) and Rooks' Nest (later Croome House), Surrey ('c'.1818). He was a member of the Architects' Club and a fellow of the Royal and Linnean societies and of the Society of Antiquaries. 
As architect to the trustees of Ramsgate harbour, Shaw designed the clock house, the steps known as Jacob's Ladder, and the obelisk erected to commemorate a visit by George IV on his way to Hanover. He died suddenly on 30 July 1832 at the age of fifty-six, while working at Ramsgate harbour, and was buried at Bexley, Kent. 


Shaw was one of the official referees of metropolitan buildings from 1844 to 1855, when the duties of that office were transferred to the Metropolitan Board of Works. Described as early as 1843 in 'The Builder' as a designer in the manner of Wren, a recent commentator noted further that 'it was as a designer of buildings in a revived 'Renaissance' style that Shaw was most successful and original' (Colvin, 'Archs'.). Shaw was a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects. He died on 9 July 1870, at his home, 10 Sheffield Gardens, Kensington, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He left a widow, Jane, and a son, William Francis Shaw. 


@@@@@


doc= 25259


John Shaw junior (1803-1870), architect, was born on 17 May 1803 at 25 Great James Street, Bedford Row, Holborn, London. He was a pupil of his father, whom he succeeded as architect to Christ's Hospital. About 1825 he became surveyor to Eton College, for which he designed the Tudor Gothic buildings in Weston's Yard at Eton, and developed the Chalcots estate near Chalk Farm in Hampstead, building semi-detached villas (1840-50). His designs for the hall, schools, dormitories, and chapel at Eton were exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1825 and 1846, together with designs for a marine villa at Bognor, the Law Life Assurance Company, and the Royal Naval School at Deptford (later Goldsmiths' College), built in 1843-4. He built Holy Trinity Church, Great New Street, Fetter Lane, in 1838, following which he published 'A letter on ecclesiastical architecture as applicable to modern churches: addressed to the lord bishop of London' (1839), in which he advocated the use of the Romanesque style for that purpose. His last design, in the style of Wren, was Wellington College, Sandhurst, Berkshire (1855-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 25260


Shaw, Joseph (1671-1733), legal writer, was the son of John Shaw, gentleman, of All Hallows, Stayning, London. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 10 June 1687, was admitted to the Middle Temple on 15 April 1687, and was called to the bar on 3 May 1695. About 1700 he made a tour through the Netherlands, Flanders, and part of France, and embodied his observations in 'Letters to a Nobleman'. These were addressed to Anthony Ashley Cooper, third earl of Shaftesbury, whose friendship and patronage he enjoyed. The letters were published in 1709. They are full of interesting details of the state of those countries during the brief interval of peace which followed the treaty of Ryswick. 
In later life Shaw settled at Epsom in Surrey, and devoted himself to legal study. In 1728 he published 'The Practical Justice of the Peace' (6th edn., 1756). Shortly before his death he published a companion volume entitled 'Parish Law', dedicated to his friend Sir John Fortescue Aland, justice of common pleas. The manual presented the law relevant to the parish's secular responsibilities and to its responsibilities for maintenance of both church and minister. In the nineteenth century, this manual was republished in conjunction with J. F. Archbold's 'Parish Officer'. The fourth and last edition of this conjoint publication appeared in 1895. Shaw died at Lambeth, Surrey, on 24 October 1733, leaving a son, Joseph, who afterwards resided at Epsom. 


@@@@@


doc= 25261


Shaw, Lachlan (1686?-1777), Church of Scotland minister and historian, was the son of Donald Shaw, a farmer at Rothiemurchus, Inverness-shire. He was educated at Ruthven and then at King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA on 2 May 1711. In the following year he was employed as a schoolteacher at Abernethy in Perthshire, and was presented a divinity bursary for the next two years. After studying theology at Edinburgh University he was licensed on 24 April 1716 by the presbytery of Haddington, and was appointed to the parish of Kingussie on 20 September. He transferred to Cawdor on 19 November 1719 with Helen, daughter of David Stuart, a collector of excise at Inverness, whom he had married on 1 October; the couple had one daughter and one son. Following Helen's death he married, on 14 March 1727, Anna (died in or after 1777), daughter of Duncan Grant, a bailie of Inverness, with whom he had a further eleven children, among them Duncan Shaw. On 9 May 1734 Shaw transferred to a post at Elgin, Moray, and remained there until his retirement in April 1774. 
In addition to his work in the church, Shaw was a respected local historian who corresponded with many eminent figures, among them the judge and antiquary Sir David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes, and the naturalist Thomas Pennant, who visited him at Elgin in 1769. He wrote the account 'Of Elgin and the shire of Murray' in Pennant's 'Tour of Scotland in 1769', which appeared in 1771. Shaw was chiefly known for his 'History of the Province of Moray', published in 1775 and posthumously revised and republished in 1827 and 1882. During the early 1750s he also continued 'A Genealogical Dedication of the Family of Rose of Kilravock', written by Hew Rose in 1683-4 and printed in 1848. His 'Account of the family of Mackintosh', written in 1758, remained unpublished. Shaw died on 23 February 1777 and was buried near the high altar of Elgin Cathedral, where a memorial slab and window were dedicated to him in 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 25262


Shaw, Mary (1814-1876), singer, the daughter of Thomas Postans, a steward of the officers' mess at St James's Palace, was born at Lea in Kent. From September 1828 to June 1831 she was a student at the Royal Academy of Music, and afterwards became a pupil of Sir George Smart. She made her first appearance in public as a contralto in 1834. At the amateur music festival at Exeter Hall in the November of that year she attracted attention, and in 1835 she sang at the York festival. About the end of the year she married Alfred Shaw, an artist. In 1836 she sang at the Norwich and Liverpool festivals, and at the latter took the contralto part in Mendelssohn's 'St Paul' on its first performance in England. After singing at the Gloucester festival in 1838 she took part in the Gewandhaus concerts at Leipzig under Mendelssohn's direction. In a letter to the directors of the Philharmonic Society, dated 19 January 1839, Mendelssohn described Clara Novello and Mrs Shaw as 'the best concert singers we have had in this country for a long time'. Mary Shaw next appeared at La Scala, Milan, on 17 November 1839, in the first performance of Verdi's 'Oberto'. In 1842 she returned to England and made her London operatic debut at Covent Garden with Adelaide Kemble: she had much success in 'Il matrimonio segreto' and 'Semiramide'. In 1843 she sang at the Sacred Harmonic Society with Clara Novello and at the Birmingham festival. Soon afterwards her husband became insane, and her distress affected her voice. She retired from the stage and for three or four years resorted to teaching, appearing in public only at an annual benefit concert. Her husband died in 1847 and eventually she married John Frederick Robinson, a country solicitor, when she finally retired. She died from breast cancer on 9 September 1876 at her husband's residence, Hadleigh Hall, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 25263


Shaw, Patrick (1796-1872), legal writer, was born at Ayr, the son of Charles Shaw, clerk of the county of Ayr, and his wife, Barbara Wright, the daughter of a customs official at Greenock. His grandfather was David Shaw DD, moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1775, who is referred to by Burns in the 'Twa Herds' (Burns, 'Poetical Works', ed. Chambers, 1836, 56). Alexander Shaw, Sir Charles Shaw (1795-1871), and John Shaw (1792-1827) were his brothers. In boyhood Patrick lost a leg through an accident. 
In 1819 Shaw was called to the Scottish bar, and in 1821 he commenced with his friend James Ballantine, and afterwards with Alexander Dunlop, a series of reports entitled 'Cases Decided in the Court of Session'. In 1824 he commenced a similar series of reports of decisions in the House of Lords on appeal from the Scottish courts. These reports and others, covering other Scottish courts, remain valuable as historical records of precedent, and Shaw enhanced their contemporary usefulness by publishing supplementary digests of the decisions. 
In 1848 Shaw was appointed sheriff of chancery, and he held the post until 1869, when he resigned owing to failing health. On 12 January 1860 he married Susan Khanim, the fourth daughter of William Fullarton of Skeldon, Ayrshire. Shaw died at his home, 36 Charlotte Square, Edinburgh, on 12 February 1872. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 25264


Shaw, Peter (1694-1763), physician and author, was born in March 1694 in Lichfield, Staffordshire, the youngest of the four children of Robert Shaw ('c'.1650-1704), master of Lichfield grammar school, and his wife, Ann ('b'. 'c'.1658). He was baptized in St Mary's Church, Lichfield, on 9 April 1694. Nothing is known of his education, though he evidently acquired competence in Latin and studied medicine, perhaps at a foreign university. When in the early 1720s he embarked on a career in London as an author and translator of medical works, he styled himself MD. 
Shaw's first two publications, both of which appeared in 1723, were 'A Treatise of Incurable Diseases' and an edition of the 'Praelectiones pharmaceuticae' by the apothecary John Quincy. The following year, the anonymous work 'The Juice of the Grape' was ascribed to him. His 'New Practice of Physic' (1726) comprised a catalogue of diseases with diagnostic signs, prognoses, and the appropriate regimen for each, said to be drawn from the practice of the leading physicians of London; the book was remarkably successful, reaching a seventh edition in 1753. Shaw also turned his talents to editing and translating the works of prominent scientific writers. He produced an abridged and 'methodized' edition of 'The Philosophical Works of the Honourable Robert Boyle' (3 vols., 1725), and, later, 'The Philosophical Works of Francis Bacon' (3 vols., 1733). He pioneered the introduction into England of continental works on chemistry, collaborating with the encyclopaedia writer Ephraim Chambers to bring out 'New Method of Chemistry' (1727), a translation of a work by Herman Boerhaave. This translation was prepared from a French edition, unauthorized by the author, and from student notes of Boerhaave's lectures at Leiden. Shaw added extensive footnotes, comparing Boerhaave's doctrines with those of Newton and his English followers. In 1730 he produced a digest of the Jena lectures of Georg Ernst Stahl, 'Philosophical Principles of Universal Chemistry'. 
Shaw followed these publications with works of his own, designed to encourage the development of chemistry as a science of potentially widespread utility. His 'Three Essays in Artificial Philosophy or Universal Chemistry' (1731) directed attention particularly to the distillation and fermentation of liquors. With the instrument maker Francis Hauksbee the younger, Shaw published, in 1731, 'Proposals for a Course of Chemical Experiments' and 'An Essay for Introducing a Portable Laboratory'. The latter was accompanied by the offer for sale of a new design for a portable chemical furnace. The same year, Shaw embarked on a series of lectures on chemistry and its applications, delivered in London in 1731 and 1732, and in Scarborough the following year. His 'Chemical Lectures' was published in 1734. 
In 1733 Shaw moved from London to Scarborough, where he found a fashionable audience for his lectures among visitors to the spa. He entered into collaboration with a Scarborough apothecary, Culmer Cockerill, and the London booksellers Ward and Chandler, to promote the medical benefits of the waters. Having already published 'New Experiments and Observations upon Mineral Waters' (1731), a translation of a work by Friedrich Hoffman, Shaw followed up with his own 'Inquiry into the Contents, Virtues, and Uses of the Scarborough Spaw-Waters' (1734), and the anonymous 'Dissertation on the Contents, Virtues, and Uses of Cold and Hot Mineral Springs' (1735). About this time, he married Frances Tidmarsh (1700-1768), the widow of Richard Tidmarsh and daughter of John Hyde of Sundridge, Kent. The couple had four children, Jane, Peter, Elizabeth, who married the physician Richard Warren, and Margaret. 
Shaw's popularity among the fashionable nobility and gentry in Scarborough enabled him to develop a successful career in medical practice, which displaced authorship as his primary occupation. He benefited from a growing reputation as a doctor, and his connections with prominent society figures and physicians proved valuable when he moved back to London in 1738. The same year, he defended the controversial claims of Joanna Stephens to have discovered an effective medicine for dissolving urinary calculi. Shaw published an 'Examination of the Reasons for and Against the Subscription for a Medicament for the Stone' and 'Inquiries on the Nature of Miss Stephens's Medicaments', both in 1738. Having been summoned in 1739 by the censor's board of the Royal College of Physicians for practising without a licence in the capital, Shaw became a licentiate of the college in 1740, and subsequently (in 1754) a fellow. The patronage of Sir Edward Hulse, a court physician, and later physician to the duke of Newcastle, aided Shaw's rise to a prominent position in the medical profession. In 1751 he was granted an MD degree from Cambridge University by royal mandate, and he became a fellow of the Royal Society the following year. In 1753 he was appointed physician-extraordinary and later physician-in-ordinary to George II, and regularly accompanied the king on his visits to Hanover. He also attended the duke of Newcastle and his family, and the duke of Grafton. On the accession of George III, in 1760, he was confirmed as physician-in-ordinary to the new monarch. 
Shaw died in London on 15 March 1763. His wife survived him. He was buried in the nave of Wimbledon church, where there is an inscription to his memory. Shaw's son-in-law, Richard Warren, spoke warmly of him in his Harveian oration of 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 25265


Ralph Shaw (d. 1484), a Cambridge graduate, doctor of theology, and a canon of St Paul's, who preached a sermon at Paul's Cross, claiming that the then duke of Gloucester was the only lawful claimant to the throne. Reportedly he had formerly been a popular preacher, but so hostile was Dr Shaw's audience on this occasion that his death in the following year was said to have been due to chagrin at the cold reception accorded to his sermon. Edmund Shaw himself, as mayor, was extensively involved in the ceremonies surrounding the coronation of Richard III, and he was subsequently knighted and sworn of the privy council. The value of his commercial dealings with Richard and of the grants he received suggests that, at the very least, the king was keen to secure his support. Shaw survived Richard's downfall without apparent difficulty, however, and made no specific mention of or spiritual provision for his brother when he drew up his testament in March 1488. 


@@@@@


doc= 25266


Shaw, Robert Barkley (1839-1879), explorer and government agent, son of Robert Grant Shaw, of Box, Wiltshire, and his wife, Martha Barkley, was born at Upper Clapton, London, on 12 July 1839. His sister Anna married Robert Younghusband. He was educated at schools on the continent, at Marlborough College, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1859 but did not take a degree. The effects of rheumatic fever forced him to give up the idea of entering the army, and in 1859 he went to Kunyara in the Himalayas, where he settled as a tea planter. 
Eager for adventure, he decided to explore the country north of the Karakoram; and, after one or two tentative excursions, he started in May 1868 for eastern Turkestan, travelling as a merchant, and taking with him trading goods, a prismatic compass, and a translation of Herodotus's 'History'. He reached Yarkand on 8 December, and Kashgar on 11 January 1869, being the first Englishman to visit those places. At Kashgar, though not allowed to enter the city, he was treated graciously by Yakub Beg, the ruler of the country, who, mainly in consequence of the advice given him by Shaw, dispatched an envoy to India asking that a British officer be sent to arrange a treaty. Shaw returned by the Karakoram Pass, and proceeded to England. His 'Visit to High Tartary, Yarkand and Kashgar' appeared in 1871, but while preparing it for the press he heard that Lord Mayo had decided to send an official mission to eastern Turkestan and at once telegraphed an offer of his services; this was accepted, and he accompanied Douglas Forsyth on his first mission. Yakub Beg was far from Yarkand when they arrived there on 3 August 1870, and the mission came back with its principal object unachieved. Shaw returned to England, where in 1872 the Royal Geographical Society awarded him the patron's gold medal for his explorations in eastern Turkestan and especially for his valuable astronomical observations, which fixed the position of Yarkand, Kashgar, and other places. 
In recognition of his service to the government, Lord Mayo appointed Shaw to the political department, and he was made British joint commissioner in Ladakh. In 1875 he went to Yarkand in charge of the ratified treaty made by Sir Douglas Forsyth in 1874. He continued to write, publishing on the Eastern Turkish language in 1875 and the Ghalchah languages in 1876. He also contributed to the Royal Geographical and Royal Asiatic societies' publications. In 1878 he was appointed resident at Mandalay in Upper Burma. During the troubles which followed the death of King Mengdun in October 1878, his position at the residency was one of great danger; but throughout the crisis he acted with courage and discretion. He wrote to King Thibaw, who was massacring kinsfolk and rivals wholesale, that if any further murders took place he should, without waiting for orders from Calcutta, at once haul down the British flag; and he sent at the same time his assistant to explain the consequences such a measure would involve. He was made CSI and died at Mandalay on 15 June 1879. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 25267


Shaw, Samuel (1634/5-1696), clergyman, was born at Repton, Derbyshire, the son of Thomas Shaw, blacksmith. Educated at Repton School, he was admitted as a sizar, aged fifteen, to St John's College, Cambridge, on 23 December 1650. After graduating BA in 1656 he became master of the grammar school at Tamworth, Staffordshire; there he assisted the puritan vicar, Thomas Blake, at whose funeral he delivered an oration that was printed in Blake's posthumous 'Vindiciae foederis' (1658). In January 1658 Shaw was ordained by the Wirksworth (Derbyshire) classis, having been invited the previous August to the curacy of Moseley, Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, by Richard Grevis. There he worked closely with Thomas Hall, the presbyterian curate of King's Norton. Through the influence of Captain Gervas Pigot of Thrumpton, Nottinghamshire, he received the protector's presentation to the sequestered rectory of Long Whatton, Leicestershire, of which he took possession on 5 June 1658. But, though the crown confirmed Shaw's title in September 1660, the opposition of Sir John Pretyman, MP for Leicester, forced his removal the following year, and he retired to Cotes, near Loughborough, Leicestershire. About this time he married Jane, daughter of Ferdinando Poole, the ejected vicar of Thrumpton. 
In 1665 relatives from London carried the plague to Shaw's house. He lost 'two tender babes' and a sister during three months' confinement. The 'senseless aspersions' of Shaw's neighbours, some of whom blamed him for introducing the plague into their community, compounded his grief (Shaw, 'Voice of One Crying', foreword). Yet his experience of God's love in the midst of these afflictions inspired him to write the two books for which he is best known -- 'The Voice of one Crying in a Wilderness' (1666) and 'Immanuel' (1667). Both sought to wean men from their 'false notions' of religion. This meant criticizing even his fellow nonconformists, those 'pretenders to religion', who still complain of 'persecution, [whose] cry is all for liberty'. Such complaints betrayed a 'mere selfish carnal principle'. For Shaw, true religion consisted not in performing duties, reforming worship, or 'raging against... Antichrist' ('Immanuel', preface), but in God's 'changing the hearts, and as it were deifying the souls of men' ('Immanuel', 18). Frequently reprinted, 'Immanuel' has remained popular. 
At the end of 1666 Shaw left Cotes for Ashby-de-la-Zouch, where in January 1668 he was appointed master of the free school. His reputation for moderation earned him the respect of prominent Anglicans, who were willing to wink at his nonconformity. Thus, in December 1670, Lord Conway persuaded Archbishop Sheldon to grant Shaw a licence to teach without requiring full subscription; Bishop Fuller of Lincoln, 'glad to have so worthy a man in his diocese', did likewise. 'Pleasant and facetious', the new schoolmaster had 'great skill... suiting himself to the temper of boys' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.429-30). During Shaw's tenure Ashby School regained the prestige it had had at the beginning of the century under John Brinsley, and soon attracted scholars from as far away as London, many of whom went on to careers in the established church. Shaw's efforts to revive the school involved him in a long-running quarrel over rents with the feoffees, whom he regarded as 'enemies to learning' (Hunt. L., Hastings MSS, HA 10776). Fortunately he enjoyed the backing of local gentry, including Sir Edward Abney, and the town's clergymen, the godly conformists Alexander Jones and Ithiel Smart the younger. 
Of Shaw's lesser-known works, his 'A Receipt for the State-Palsie' (1660) attributed England's political troubles to the fact that 'every man is left to the free choice of... his own religion', and called upon magistrates to wield the sword for 'the terror of evil doers' (p. 18). A few months later, however, a more subdued Shaw commended repentance and resignation in a sermon dedicated to the presbyterian MP Sir John Swynfen ('Samuel in Sackcloth', 1660). In addition to a treatise against usury, 'The True Christian's Test' (1682), much admired by Bishop Thomas Barlow, Shaw published 'Adam Abel... a Discourse... for Funeral Occasions' (1692), and an English translation of 'An Apologie for the Ministry' (1660) by his friend Thomas Hall. He also published three guides to grammar and two of the comedies he wrote for his students to perform at Christmas time -- 'Words Made Visible' (1679) and 'The Different Humours of Men' (1692). 
Shaw died at Ashby on 22 January 1696, and was buried there two days later on 24 January. His brother-in-law, William Cross, ejected vicar of Beeston, Nottinghamshire, preached his funeral sermon. Shaw was survived by his wife, Jane, two married daughters, Frances Bragg and Jane Warner, and two sons, Samuel and Ferdinando Shaw (bap. 1674, d. 1745). The latter published several works as minister of Friar Gate Presbyterian meeting, Derby, from 1699 until his death in 1745. 


@@@@@


doc= 25268


Shaw, Stebbing (1762-1802), historian, was born about the spring of 1762, apparently at or near Stone, Staffordshire. His father, also named Stebbing (1736/7-1799), was the son of John Stebbing Shaw of Stone, and was rector of Hartshorne, Derbyshire, from 1769 and also of Seckington, Warwickshire, from 1785. The elder Stebbing's first wife was evidently the daughter and heir of John Hyatt of Stallington in Stone parish, and the younger Stebbing was their only child. His father had another son and two daughters by a second marriage. 
Shaw was educated at Repton School, Derbyshire, where he acquired a taste for literature and a lifelong enthusiasm for the violin. He was admitted pensioner at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1780 and graduated BA in 1784, MA in 1787, and BD in 1796. He was elected scholar in 1784 and fellow in 1786, in which year he was also ordained. Probably in 1785 he went to live at the home of Sir Robert Burdett, a family friend, at Ealing as tutor to Sir Robert's grandson Francis. In 1788 he published an account of a tour the previous year to the western highlands of Scotland and in 1789 an account of a tour in 1788 to the west of England. Also in 1789 he was admitted to the reading-room of the British Museum. Between that year and 1792 he and his friend Samuel Egerton Brydges produced four volumes of a periodical called 'The Topographer'; in 1792 there were seven numbers of a continuation, 'Topographical Miscellanies'. Shaw later stated that it was Brydges's enthusiasm for antiquarian pursuits since their time together at Queens' which inspired his own efforts. In the summer of 1791 he went to live with his father at Hartshorne, and in the autumn he began work on the history of the neighbouring county of Staffordshire. That was to be his main occupation for the rest of his life. 
Shaw was indefatigable in his research. His former headmaster at Repton, William Bagshaw Stevens, dined at Hartshorne in October 1792 and found Shaw 'busily immersed in Topography'; the following August Stevens described him as 'pregnant with Topography' ('Journal of the Revd William Bagshaw Stevens', ed. G. Galbraith, 52, 93). Shaw made many tours of Staffordshire, working in the muniment rooms and libraries of the nobility and gentry and also making numerous drawings. He spent much of the year in London, where he lodged near the British Museum. He acquired large collections of manuscripts, by purchase, gift, or loan, and secured extensive help from scholars and other experts. In 1795 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and in 1799 the British Museum accepted his offer of work on the Harleian collection, which was being catalogued. Also in 1799 he succeeded his father as rector of Hartshorne. 
The first of Shaw's three projected volumes entitled 'The History and Antiquities of Staffordshire' was published in 1798. It covered part of Offlow hundred (south-east Staffordshire) and the city of Lichfield, with introductory sections on the county as a whole. Volume 2 followed in 1801, covering the rest of Offlow hundred and all of Seisdon hundred (south-west Staffordshire, including Wolverhampton). Shaw had originally intended to include Cuttlestone hundred (the area to the north) but decided to hold it over; corrected proofs of part of that section existed by the time of his death. His diligence was not matched by his execution, which was unsystematic and hurried, and Lord Bagot's terse comment some years later is a fair judgement: 'What he did publish is full of 'curious matter', miserably ill arranged' (William Salt L, Stafford, S. MS. 478, Bagot). On the other hand Shaw's work was the first attempt at a large-scale history of Staffordshire, based on a wide range of sources and generously illustrated. At the least it has proved, along with his unpublished collections, a valuable quarry for later historians. 
Shaw, who remained unmarried, was of a quiet disposition. His health was poor, and overwork combined with financial worry and sensitivity to criticism led finally to mental breakdown. In 1799 he confessed to his friend Samuel Pipe Wolferstan, the antiquarian squire of Statfold, near Tamworth, that 'he did not feel all his former alacrity for excursions' (Staffs. RO, D. 1527/24, 22 July). Such excursions during hot weather in 1800 brought on a fever and sleeplessness. In October 1801 he suffered a worse attack, during which he was totally deranged. As a result of another attack in London in the spring of 1802 he was removed for a time from the care of his half-sister Elizabeth into the keeping of a Dr Willis. In October he had a violent attack at Hartshorne and was taken for medical advice to London, where he died on 28 October. He was buried at Hartshorne on 6 November 1802. 
Shaw's collections, including the printed stock, passed to his half-sister Elizabeth as his heir. In 1810 she sold the manuscripts to Samuel Pipe Wolferstan, who in turn sold them to his friend William Hamper in 1813. The same year Hamper bought Shaw's printed stock along with his copper plates and drawings from Elizabeth's husband John Gillam. After Hamper's death in 1831 his Staffordshire collections were sold to William Salt and are now in the William Salt Library at Stafford. The rest of Hamper's library was sold to the bibliophile Sir Thomas Phillipps. It included Shaw's own copy of 'Staffordshire' with a set of the corrected proof sheets for the continuation of volume 2 bound in. This later passed into the ownership of Sheffield City Library in 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 25269


Shaw, Thomas (1694-1751), traveller, son of Gabriel Shaw, shearman-dyer of Kendal, Westmorland, and his wife, who was probably called Agnes, was born on 4 June 1694 at Kendal and baptized there on 18 June. Having attended Kendal grammar school, he matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 5 December 1711, graduating BA in 1716 and MA on 16 January 1720. Later that year he was appointed chaplain to the English factory at Algiers at a salary of $100 per annum. During his time there he travelled widely, to Egypt, Sinai, Cyprus, and the Holy Land in 1721-2 and to Tunis and Carthage in 1727, as well as making various excursions into the interior of Barbary (Algiers, Tripoli, and Morocco). In Barbary travel was comparatively safe, but in 'Aqabah he was stripped naked by robbers, and while travelling with 6000 pilgrims to Jerusalem he was seized and held to ransom. However, with 'a body capable of bearing the fatigues of travelling united to a mind rich in most kinds of human learning' ('European Magazine', 19, 1791, 83), in all these regions he made careful observations of the geography, natural history, customs, and antiquities. In 1733, having married Joanna, the widow of his friend and benefactor, Edward Holden, consul at Algiers, Shaw returned to England. Elected a fellow of Queen's in 1727, he became doctor of divinity in 1734 and was presented to the vicarage of Godshill, Isle of Wight. He was also elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 13 June 1734, having contributed to their 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1729, through Sir Hans Sloane, with 'A geographical description of the kingdom of Tunis'. 
Four years later Shaw published 'Travels, or, Observations Relating to Several Parts of Barbary and the Levant' (1738), which included maps, plates, lists of animals, plants (about 640 species), fossils, coins, and inscriptions, and a copious index. He had engaged the botanist Johann Jakob Dillenius to catalogue his flora. Dedicated to George II, the book also acknowledged the generous patronage of Queen Caroline. The bibliophile Thomas Dibdin called the work 'a safe inmate' of a well-chosen collection and exhorted 'Fly, fly, to secure it' ('Library Companion', 1824, 2.48). It was especially admired for the illustrations of natural history, of classical authors, and of the scriptures. Gibbon honourably excepts him from the crowd of 'blind' travellers (E. Gibbon, 'The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire', chap. 24), while his scrupulous veracity was vindicated by James Bruce and later African explorers. 
Academic acrimony, however, arose when Richard Pococke, in his 'Description of the East' (2 vols., 1743-5) took issue with Shaw on some, mainly geographical, statements. From his observations in Egypt, Shaw theorized that originally the delta of the Nile was part of the sea, while to the south was a valley bounded by mountains. Gradually over the centuries the soil brought down by the inundations had built up the banks until, while the delta became cultivable, the land to the far south was raised too high to be flooded, causing it to become barren. Pococke disagreed (1.39), believing the channel of the Nile was always augmented in proportion to its banks, and therefore nothing changed. Shaw's explanation is interesting in that it is based on firsthand observation and in that it admits of the possibility of landscape change through the operation in the past of presently observed processes. Elsewhere in his work, however, with references to 'the deluge', Shaw shows his adherence to traditional views of the earth's history. 
Wounded over the Nile disagreement by being 'in so unexpected a Manner... drawn into a Controversy' (Shaw, 15) by a man he considered a friend, Shaw issued a supplement to his 'Travels' in 1746, 'wherein some objections lately made are fully considered and answered', and in 1747 'A Further Vindication in a Letter to R. Clayton, Bishop of Clogher'. Both supplements were incorporated into the second and most valued edition of Shaw's 'Travels' (1757), which, although published after his death, had been prepared by himself. A third edition, in two volumes, was published in 1808. The work was translated into German, Dutch, and French. 
When on 18 August 1740 Shaw became principal of St Edmund Hall, Oxford, he found 'every Part of it in Ruins, and without an Inhabitant' and immediately set about repairs. He restored the eastern end of the north range of the front quadrangle in 1741, paying for this with 'the whole Profits I received from my Book of Travels', about $400 (Shaw to Robert Tomlinson, letter 3d; Cowdrey, 58). Through a fund-raising appeal, he was able to restore the western half of the range in 1746-7. 
Shaw was appointed regius professor of Greek in 1741 and presented by Queen's College to the vicarage of Bramley, Hampshire, in 1742. He died there on 15 August 1751 'in high reputation for knowledge, probity, and pleasantry' (Nicholson, 429). He was buried at Bramley in September, where a memorial monument was erected in the church by his widow; a commemorative tablet was also placed in the English church at Algiers. He left to the university the manuscripts of his travels, with other papers, his collection of natural curiosities, and some antique coins and busts, three of which were engraved in 'Marmoria Oxoniensa'. Forster named a botanical species 'Shawia' in his honour. Portraits of him at St Edmund Hall and Queen's College show 'a stout and fierce, but not ill-tempered looking man' (note from Provost Magrath, 'DNB') with a countenance 'grotesque, but marked most strongly with jocularity and good humour'. An etching from a portrait then belonging to Sir William Musgrave, bt, prefixes an article in the 'European Magazine' which bears the appearance of authorship by someone who knew him. He was, it says: 'Good, humane, temperate, sociable and cheerful to the highest degree, as long as any of his contemporaries exist, the infinite humor of his conversation will never be forgotten; which was heightened by a peculiarity of figure and countenance... his humor was chiefly exerted in the innocent conviviality of the Common Room, where his wit was provoked and sharpened by the raillery of his surrounding friends. (19, Feb 1791, 85)' 



@@@@@


doc= 25270


Shaw, Thomas Budd (1813-1862), translator and literary scholar, was born on 12 October 1813 at 28 Gower Street, London, the youngest of the nine children of the architect John Shaw (1776-1832), and his wife, Elizabeth Hester, 'nee' Whitfield ('bap'. 1776, died 1864). He was frail and myopic, but in 1822 his uncle the Revd Francis Whitfield took him to the warmer climate of Berbice (in modern Guyana), where his health improved. In 1826 he was enrolled at Shrewsbury School, where he demonstrated a voracious appetite for classical and modern literature. In 1833 he took up residence at St John's College, Cambridge, and kept eleven terms over the next six years. Open-handed and convivial, he frequented alehouses and the billiards room of the Dramatic Club; his rolling gait made him a familiar figure in the town. In 1836 he published anonymously 'Theophrastus in Cambridge', a fresh and witty treatment of young men's vices and follies, and then edited 'The Fellow' and 'The Individual', ephemeral but entertaining weekly miscellanies for undergraduates. To these and to national journals he contributed original poems and essays, as well as verse translations from Latin, Italian, and German. 
Before graduating BA in 1839 Shaw already lived partly in London and earned what he could by tutoring the sons of businessmen, but he shifted from address to cheap address, and on 26 June 1840 was declared an insolvent debtor; he left immediately for Russia. After examinations at St Petersburg University in Latin, Greek, arithmetic, and English literature, he was issued on 8 October with a licence to teach these subjects and until the end of 1841 served as tutor in the household of A. V. Vasilchikov in Moscow, surprising people as much by his Cambridge cap and gown as by his ability to read the 'New Testament' in Greek. 
Back in St Petersburg in 1842, Shaw became friendly with Samuel Warrand (1792- 'c'.1855), English tutor to the imperial family and professor at the university, who had just established an 'English Review of Literature'. Shaw edited this until it ceased publication in July 1843. As well as reprinting extracts from the British press on a multitude of topics, and introducing literary works such as Dickens's 'Barnaby Rudge', it carried verse and prose by Shaw, including articles on Wordsworth and Defoe. Also thanks to Warrand, whose daughter Annette Frances he married on 15 October 1842, Shaw became adjunct professor of English literature at Pushkin's old school, the Imperial Alexander Lyceum at Tsarskoye Selo. He proved a most successful teacher and was commissioned to write a textbook, which, first published in Russia in 1846, was greatly expanded as 'Outlines of English Literature' and reprinted in London and Philadelphia in 1849. 
From 1843 Shaw began to translate Russian literature. In addition to translating popular novels such as Bestuzhev-Marlinsky's 'Ammalat-Bek' and Lazhechnikov's 'The Heretic', he abridged Gogol's story 'The Portrait' and produced a remarkably vigorous yet faithful version of 'The gifts of Terek', the first significant English translation from the poetry of Lermontov. Most importantly, he promoted Pushkin's English reputation, translating 'The Coffin-Maker' and 'Kirdjali' and publishing an informative biography in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (June-August 1845). This included copious translated excerpts from Pushkin and drew on knowledge gained from friends of the poet such as P. A. Pletnyov (in whose household Shaw was tutor at one time). Writing as he did in the Russia of Nicholas I, Shaw was unable to discuss Pushkin's political views, but his study proved otherwise reliable and authoritative. 
In 1851 Shaw took his MA degree in Cambridge, and, despite stiff competition, succeeded his father-in-law as professor of English at the University of St Petersburg. Afterwards he also became tutor to the young dukes Nikolay and Yevgeny of Leuchtenberg, and to the little grand dukes Vladimir and Aleksey, third and fourth sons of Alexander II. He had some influence on the course of literature both as censor of English books and by his encouragement of the critic Druzhinin, who profited from Shaw's 'Outlines'. Shaw himself still published, contributing the entry 'Petersburg' to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and writing about Chaucer for 'Biblioteka dlya chteniya', but he chiefly devoted himself to a revision of the 'Outlines' and to a companion volume, 'Choice Specimens of English Literature'; both were edited after his death by Dr William Smith, and the newly named 'History of English Literature' remained in print until the end of the century. 
Shaw, who for some years had been obese, contracted severe chest pains and died of an aneurysm at St Petersburg on 26 November 1862. His funeral was held five days later at the chapel of the British factory. A monument was erected at the lyceum to this fine scholar who spanned two literary worlds, uniquely able to interpret each through the eyes of both. 


@@@@@


doc= 25271


Shaw, William (1749-1831), Gaelic grammarian and lexicographer, was born on 3 February 1749 at Clachaig on the island of Arran. He received his early education in Ayr and, from about 1768, at the University of Glasgow, where he was awarded the degree of MA, apparently in 1772, though one source gives 1777 as the date of his graduation. While a student he taught at a grammar school in Glenorchy, Argyll, leaving the post under something of a cloud. 
Shaw has come to prominence partly through his friendship with Samuel Johnson, to whom he was introduced in London in 1774. Johnson encouraged him to publish 'An Analysis of the Gaelic Language', having seen the material in manuscript. Two editions were published in Edinburgh in 1778. The book has been described by a modern Gaelic scholar as 'a rudimentary grammar, with no claim to distinction beyond its being the first published work of its kind' (MacDonald, 4). With the publication of Stewart's 'Elements of Gaelic Grammar' in 1801, Shaw's work was superseded. 
In June 1779 William Shaw was presented by the duke of Gordon to the parish of Ardclach in the presbytery of Nairn. His short ministry in the Church of Scotland was to begin and end in controversy. Before his ordination and induction to the charge, which took place on 14 October 1779, a paper signed by over sixty parishioners, objecting to the morals of their prospective minister and accusing him of preaching unsound doctrine, was submitted to the presbytery. Shaw's ordination went ahead, but after his settlement few attended his services and he was so unpopular that he was even threatened with stoning. One of the objections from parishioners was that they had difficulty in understanding his Arran Gaelic dialect. His opponents also appear to have been protesting against the system of patronage within the church, by which Shaw had been elected. 
By May 1780 the synod of Moray heard complaints of absences from the parish against the minister of Ardclach, but before action could be taken the situation was resolved in August by Shaw's demission of his charge. The rest of his life was to be spent in England, where a new phase in his activities brought him a measure of fame as a writer. 
In 1780 William Shaw published 'A Galic and English Dictionary' in two volumes, and claimed to have travelled 3000 miles in Scotland and Ireland collecting material for it. Once again he became involved in a public dispute. Disappointed with the quality of the finished product, some of the subscribers refused to make the payment they had guaranteed. In the litigation that followed the lexicographer won his case, though, again, modern critics have not been favourable to the work. Shaw's dictionary has been dismissed as 'a bare list of words and equivalents, at least as many Irish as Scottish Gaelic among them, and as many obsolete as contemporary' (MacDonald, 14). 
Shaw was also involved in the heated controversy regarding the authenticity of James Macpherson's 'Ossianic' poems. He shared the scepticism of Samuel Johnson in questioning the genuineness of the material published by Macpherson, and issued in 1781 'An Enquiry into the Authenticity of the Poems Ascribed to Ossian'. John Clark wrote a reply to Shaw's 'Enquiry'. This resulted in a rejoinder from Shaw. According to James Boswell, 'Johnson took Mr. Shaw under his protection, and gave him his assistance in writing a reply, which has been admired by the best judges, and by many considered as conclusive' (Fitzgerald, 458). 
Having withdrawn from the Church of Scotland, William Shaw in course of time became an Anglican clergyman, apparently at Johnson's suggestion. (Shaw had published, anonymously, in 1785, 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the late Dr Samuel Johnson'.) He enrolled at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1787, and was eventually awarded the degree of bachelor of divinity in 1800. From 1795 to 1831 he served as rector of Chelvey in Somerset. 
Shaw continued to be embroiled in controversy, and in 1801 used his pen to publish a pamphlet attacking Hannah More's proposals for establishing Sunday schools. In 1802, using the pseudonym the Revd Sir Archibald MacSarcasm, Bart., he published the 'Life of Hannah More, with a Critical Review of her Writings'. The long life of this colourful and controversial clergyman came to an end at the rectory, Chelvey, on 16 September 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 25272


Shaw, William (1797-1853), agricultural editor, eldest son of John Shaw of Bath, was born in Bath and spent two years (1813-15) at Wadham College, Oxford; he was admitted to the Inner Temple on 20 June 1828 and called to the bar on 22 November 1833. He also farmed for a time in Wiltshire. He was married, but for many years separated from his wife. 
In 1832 Shaw helped to found (with his lifelong friend, Cuthbert Johnson, as well as John and Joseph Rogerson, and Dr Blackstone) a new weekly agricultural newspaper, the 'Mark Lane Express and Agricultural Journal'; he edited this paper, together with the associated monthly 'Farmer's Magazine', until his departure from England in 1852. In 1838 he began 'Johnson and Shaw's Farmer's Almanack and Calendar', which was issued under that title until 1872 and had a wide circulation. Also with Johnson, in 1844 he produced 'Principles of Agriculture', an English edition of Von Thaer's original work. Under Shaw's editorship the 'Mark Lane Express' gave comprehensive coverage of agricultural markets and technical innovation in farming. His concern to effect an improved flow of agricultural information was particularly evident in his promotion of agricultural societies. From 1834 he persistently advocated a national, non-political agricultural society for England, and the Royal Agricultural Society of England, which was established in 1838 (initially as the English Agricultural Society), was largely his creation. It was Shaw who personally persuaded John Charles, third Earl Spencer, to propose the formation of the society at the pre-Christmas meeting of the Smithfield Club in 1837. Shaw was the society's first secretary, being succeeded by James Hudson in 1840. 
Shaw also founded the London Farmers' Club in 1843 and gave great encouragement to the formation of local farmers' clubs during the early 1840s for the purpose of non-political agricultural discussion. Shaw was a strenuous advocate of a reformed system of tenant right and, with Henry Corbet (who succeeded him as editor of the 'Mark Lane Express'), produced a digest of the evidence on tenant right that had been given to Phillip Pusey's select committee on the question; this became a standard reference work. Shaw's support of tenant farmers' interests was recognized by a presentation of a service of silver plate on 1 April 1850, when he was described as 'the Cobden of Agriculture'; the previous year he had stood for parliament as a tenant-farmers' candidate in the northern division of Hampshire and, although not elected, achieved a highly creditable vote. 
'Shaw of the Strand' (as he was known at the Farmers' Club) also had a number of business interests, and he was one of the chief founders (1840) and the managing director of the Farmers' Insurance Company. He was also managing director of the Farmers' and Graziers' Mutual Cattle Insurance Association, which was founded in 1844 but fell into financial difficulties in 1849. Soon afterwards Shaw sustained heavy financial losses in connection with his support for a project to relocate the Metropolitan Cattle Market at Islington instead of Smithfield, and it was these losses which caused him to flee to Australia in November 1852. After a period of extreme adversity in Melbourne he died penniless in a remote gold-prospecting area on 5 May 1853. His demise was largely ignored by his contemporaries, and for this reason Shaw never received the historical recognition as a leader of early Victorian agricultural opinion that his achievements merited. 


@@@@@


doc= 25273


Shaw, William (1823-1895), politician and businessman, was born on 4 May 1823 in Moy, co. Tyrone. His father, Samuel Shaw, was a Congregational minister. He was educated privately and then spent some time at Trinity College, Dublin, but did not take a degree. Being intended for the Congregational ministry, he studied at Highbury College, Middlesex, a theological seminary, and then served as the minister for an independent church in George's Street, Cork, between 1846 and 1850. Following his marriage in 1850 to Charlotte Clear, daughter of a wealthy corn merchant in Cork, he abandoned the clerical profession for a mercantile career. 
Shaw initially attempted to enter parliament at the Bandon by-election on 14 February 1865, when he stood as a Liberal candidate but was defeated by 101 votes to 67. He next contested a parliamentary seat as a Liberal at Bandon at the general election in July 1865, which he narrowly lost. He then had his first success at Bandon, which he won by four votes at the general election of November 1868, when he campaigned as an independent Liberal. He represented this constituency until the dissolution in 1874, during which time he supported Gladstone's church and land bills. 
Shaw had had a connection with the Young Ireland movement as a young man and, with the founding of the Home Government Association to advocate Isaac Butt's federalist ideas in 1870, he aligned himself with the new organization. His involvement was so conspicuous that he was selected to preside at the national conference called to found the Home Rule League held at the Rotunda in November 1873. At the general election of 1874 he was returned unopposed as a home-ruler for co. Cork. He then joined the new Home Rule Party formed after the election. Along with Mitchell Henry, he often deputized for the Home Rule Party chairman, replacing Isaac Butt during his frequent absences from Westminster and acting, in 1877, as the spokesman on a motion for a select committee of the House of Commons to inquire into the demand for an Irish parliament. Shaw remained steadfast in his loyalty to Butt during the increasingly bitter disputes that erupted from 1877 over 'obstruction' and, after Butt's death in May 1879, was chosen party chairman. 
Shaw's determined support of Butt made him suspect to the growing body of MPs who gathered around Charles Stewart Parnell. Although Shaw was once again successful for co. Cork in the general election of 1880, when he came top of the poll, Parnell decided to challenge him for the sessional chairmanship -- the first and only occasion upon which the office was contested until December 1890. At the party meeting held in Dublin on 17 May, Parnell won by twenty-three votes to eighteen. Thereafter Shaw increasingly became alienated from Parnellite militancy. He declined to follow the Irish party across the floor of the House of Commons and sat on the Liberal benches throughout the 1880-85 parliament. 
In 1880 the Liberal government nominated Shaw to sit on the Bessborough commission, which was appointed to examine Irish land tenure. He refused to be identified with the Land League agitation and, along with fellow dissidents, formally ceased to act with the Irish party from 12 January 1881. During the debates on the 'Land Bill' of 1881 he supported the government and voted for the measure on the second reading, when the majority of Parnellites abstained. Thereafter he and his friends gave general support to the Liberal administration, earning Gladstone's unguarded characterization of them as 'nominal home rulers', a label eagerly seized upon by militants anxious to discredit the moderates. Shaw resigned from the moribund Home Rule League in December 1881 and, after 1882, like most of the 'nominal home rulers', was often missing from the parliamentary forum. He did not again seek election and retired from active politics in 1885. 
Although Shaw had a reputation for prudence and judgement that in political life earned him the sobriquet Sensible Shaw, his later commercial dealings proved disastrous. In 1885 the Munster Bank, of which he was the principal founder and chairman, folded. Unable to meet his personal liabilities he was declared a bankrupt on 12 January 1886. Subsequently, he lived mainly in London and was connected with several industrial and financial newspapers. He died on 19 September 1895 at his sister's home, Lislee, Enniskerry, co. Wicklow. 


@@@@@


doc= 25274


Lefevre, Charles Shaw-, Viscount Eversley (1794-1888), speaker of the House of Commons, was born on 22 February 1794 in Bedford Square, London. He was the eldest son of Charles Shaw, a barrister, of a Yorkshire family, and MP for Reading from 1802 to 1820, and his wife, Helena, only daughter of John Lefevre, a member of a Huguenot family long settled at Heckfield Place, Hartfordbridge, Hampshire; on their marriage the family name became Shaw-Lefevre. Sir John Shaw-Lefevre was Charles's younger brother. 
Shaw-Lefevre was educated at Winchester College, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1815, and MA in 1819; he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1819, but practised very little. 'Only fit to be a gamekeeper' was his mother's verdict on her son, an excellent shot. On 24 June 1817 he married Emma Laura (died 1857), daughter of Samuel Whitbread, and his wife, Elizabeth (daughter of the first Earl Grey). They had three sons, none living beyond the age of six, and three daughters. His relations with his wife later deteriorated, only her death preventing a formal separation. 
Shaw-Lefevre at once took to politics, and in 1820 was active in his brother-in-law Samuel Whitbread's contest for Middlesex, but from his father's death in 1823 he lived mainly at Heckfield Place in Hampshire, interesting himself in county business and the yeomanry. In 1830 he entered parliament for Lord Radnor's pocket borough of Downton in Wiltshire, and in 1831, after a severe contest, was returned for Hampshire. The county was divided into two constituencies by the act of 1832, and from then until his elevation to the peerage, he sat for the northern division. He was a steady supporter of the whig government, but though he moved the address in 1834, he spoke rarely. For some years he was chairman of a committee on petitions for private bills, and in 1835 was chairman of a committee on agricultural distress. He was chairman of the select committee on procedure in 1838, and carried his report almost unanimously. By attending closely to the work of these committees and to the forms of the house, and by his natural fair-mindedness and good temper, he gained a reputation which led to his selection in 1839, in spite of Spring-Rice's claims to be the government candidate, to succeed Abercromby in the speaker's chair. He was the only candidate certain of radical support, and was thus the choice of the party rather than of its leaders. He was elected in a full house on 27 May by 317 votes to 299 for Henry Goulburn. He was re-elected in 1841, in spite of Peel's possession of a majority which could easily have ousted him, and again in 1847 and 1852, on each occasion unanimously. He proved himself a speaker of distinction. He set himself to reform procedure, and during the stormy debates on Irish questions in O'Connell's time, and afterwards on free trade, maintained order firmly and impartially. He was very dignified, strong, and tactful, and the business of the house benefited greatly by his election. Asked how he selected members to speak, he replied: 'Well, I have been shooting rabbits all my life, and have learnt to mark the right one' ('The Times', 29 Dec 1888). A volume of his decisions was published by Robert Bourke in 1857, and to Shaw-Lefevre is due the removal of many unsuitable forms now forgotten. In the same year, having served longer than any speaker except Onslow, he decided to retire, and withdrew on 11 March. 
Shaw-Lefevre was raised to the peerage on 11 April as Viscount Eversley of Heckfield, and received a pension. He was nominated a church estates commissioner, which office he resigned in 1859 on becoming an ecclesiastical commissioner, and was a trustee of the British Museum. He declined the governor-generalship of Canada in 1861 and in 1867 chaired the Parliamentary Boundary Commission consequent on the 'Reform Bill' of that year. He was president of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1863, and of the Statistical Society from 1877 to 1879. Though often present, he rarely spoke in the House of Lords; he was high steward of Winchester, governor and lord lieutenant of the Isle of Wight, colonel of the Hampshire yeomanry, and until July 1879 was chairman of quarter sessions. He was made a GCB in 1885. He took a keen interest in shooting and in agriculture, and, looked after by his unmarried daughter, Emma Laura, was active almost until his death. He died on 28 December 1888 at his house, Heckfield Place, in Hampshire, but was buried beside his wife at Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 2 January 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 25275


Lefevre, Sir John George Shaw- (1797-1879), civil servant, was born at 11 Bedford Square, London, on 24 January 1797, the second of four sons of Charles Shaw (1758-1823), and his wife, Helena (1767-1834), daughter and heiress of John Lefevre of Heckfield Place, Hampshire. Charles Shaw, who assumed the additional name of Lefevre on his marriage into that Huguenot family, sat as an MP from 1792 to 1820. John was educated at Dr Faithfull's school at Warfield, and then at Eton College, before entering in 1814 Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was a close friend of Denis Le Marchant. He graduated BA as senior wrangler and first Smith's prizeman in 1818, proceeding MA in 1821, having been elected a fellow of Trinity in 1819. He went out of residence, travelling in France and Italy, where he studied Italian and modern Greek and established the foundations of his later facility in languages. He entered at the Inner Temple in 1822, and was called to the bar in 1825. He married in 1824 Rachel Emily (1801-1885), daughter of Ichabod Wright, a Nottingham banker, with whom he had a family of two sons and six daughters. 
On settling in London during the 1820s Shaw-Lefevre moved in intellectual whiggish circles. Through his father he gained election as FRS in 1820, and in the following year he was elected one of the founder members of the Political Economy Club, remaining a member until 1831. From 1828 until 1846 he was a member of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, promoted by Lord Brougham. At the same time he developed a successful legal practice as a conveyancer, handling from 1826 the land dealings of the earls Spencer. The Spencer connection led to his appointment by Lord Grey's government in November 1831 to redraw county constituency boundaries in readiness for the 'Reform Act' of 1832. His success in carrying out this sensitive assignment raised his political prospects and, standing as a whig, he was elected for Petersfield in December 1832, but early in 1833 he was unseated on petition. In April 1833, on Althorp's recommendation, Lord Stanley appointed him under-secretary for the colonies, where he had particular responsibility for distributing the $20 million compensation to slave owners in the West Indies provided for under the 'Emancipation Act'. Althorp's influence led to his appointment in August 1834, together with Frankland Lewis and George Nicholls, as one of three commissioners responsible for implementing the 'Poor Law Amendment Act'. This involved both a heavy administrative burden and much public obloquy. 
Shaw-Lefevre found the strain of the poor-law commission overwhelming and was happy to transfer, in June 1841, to the vacant joint secretaryship of the Board of Trade, responsible mainly for the legal business falling on the department and especially the regulation of joint-stock companies. He represented the Board of Trade on the council of government schools of design, and became embroiled in the heated arguments as to how best government might encourage industrial design. He retained political ambitions, and in July 1847 was brought forward by a committee chaired by Sir Edward Ryan, and including Babbage, Brougham, and Macaulay, to stand as a reforming candidate for the Cambridge University parliamentary seat. He finished at the foot of the poll. In June 1848 he was able to leave the busy departmental work at the Board of Trade when Lord John Russell appointed him to the more leisurely position of deputy clerk to the parliaments (where his brother, Charles Shaw-Lefevre, later Viscount Eversley, was speaker), and succeeded Sir George Henry Rose in 1855 as clerk of the parliaments. He held the clerkship until his retirement in March 1875. During his period of office he prepared an analysis of the standing orders of the House of Lords, achieved a more orderly publication of statutes, and helped the work of the Historical Manuscripts Commission. 
Shaw-Lefevre's services were in constant demand for various commissions, inquiries, and other public work. He was an unsalaried charity commissioner (1835-7) and a member of the colonization commission for South Australia (1835-40), chaired by Robert Torrens. After that commission was revoked he became an unpaid colonial land and emigration commissioner (1841-6). In 1836 he was appointed one of the original thirty-eight members of the senate of the University of London, which received its charter as an examining and degree-awarding body in that year, serving as vice-chancellor from 1842. His mathematical training qualified him for membership of the commission appointed in 1838 to consider replacements for the official standards of weights and measures destroyed by fire in the houses of parliament. In 1842 he served on a Treasury committee to investigate frauds connected with the issue of exchequer bills. He was an unpaid member of the British Museum commission (1847-50) and the ecclesiastical commission (from 1847). In 1847 he was called upon to settle the row between the Royal Scottish Academy, the Edinburgh Royal Institute, and the Board of Manufactures regarding support for art and the training of artists in Scotland. His recommendations to the Treasury led to the scheme for a national gallery in Scotland. He also reported to the Treasury on the Scottish Fishery Board (1848) and reviewed the unpopular annuity tax, levied to pay the stipends of the Scottish clergy (1849). 
Serving as an unsalaried member of the episcopal and capitular revenues commission (1849-50), Shaw-Lefevre was made an unpaid member of the church estates commission, created to oversee the management of the Church of England's property. On both commissions he was the whig government's nominee charged with protecting the interests of lay tenants of the church's lands. Later in 1850 he was appointed to investigate the affairs of the New Zealand Company. He was one of the five members of Macaulay's committee of 1853 which drew up the famous scheme for open competitive recruitment to the civil service of the East India Company, and he served on the inns of court commission (1854-5) which investigated legal education. In 1855 he was appointed one of the civil service commissioners, charged with organizing the examinations for posts in the home civil service which replaced the old patronage system. All these were unpaid, and he was extremely scrupulous about not taking on additional remunerative employments when receiving an official salary; the traditional stipend of $20 and a butt of ale for undertaking the auditorship of Trinity College was the only emolument he had received in addition to his income as poor law commissioner. He looked instead for honorary recognition, which was slow in coming. He was appointed CB in April 1848 and knighted (KCB) on Palmerston's recommendation in January 1857, but only after he had felt obliged to distribute a printed memorandum of his official services. 
In 1858 Shaw-Lefevre gave up his position as church estates commissioner, and early in 1862 poor health caused him to stand down from the civil service commission and the vice-chancellorship of London University. His final unsalaried services were as a member of the digest of laws (1867-70) and standards of weights and measures (1867-8) commissions, and as one of the commissioners responsible for redrafting the statutes of the ancient public schools (1868) following the report of the Clarendon commission. In 1871 he presided over the education section of the Social Science Association congress at Dublin. Oxford University conferred the degree of honorary DCL upon him in 1858. He continued to learn languages late in life, taking up Russian when he was sixty-five. In 1873 he translated and published 'The Burgomaster's Family' from the Dutch. Shaw-Lefevre died at Cliftonville, Margate, Kent, on 20 August 1879. 
Shaw-Lefevre was one of the generation of administrators who, following the passage of parliamentary reform in 1832, carried through the whig programme of renovating British institutions. He was assiduous and conscientious, with a remarkable capacity for assimilating knowledge. His official life was largely behind the scenes, and contemporaries noted that he never overcame the timidity which deterred him from positions exposing him to public criticism (Willson, 226). He belonged to a dynasty active in public life: among his children were George John Shaw-Lefevre, Baron Eversley, and Madeleine Septimia Shaw-Lefevre. His second daughter, Rachel Emily, married Arthur Hamilton Gordon, Baron Stanmore. 


@@@@@


doc= 25276


Shaxton, Nicholas (c.1485-1556), bishop of Salisbury, was a native of Norfolk and studied at Cambridge, where he proceeded BA in 1506 or 1507, MA in 1510, BTh in 1521, and DTh in 1531. He became a fellow of Gonville Hall. In 1520, before he took up controversial views, he became a university preacher and was licensed to preach anywhere in the British Isles. 
In the 1520s many members of Gonville Hall became deeply involved in the theological ferment developing at Cambridge. Certainly it was more likely that Shaxton's early interest in Lutheran ideas was spurred inside his own college rather than at any informal meetings that might have taken place at the White Horse tavern, whose importance has been overrated. Gonville Hall, with Pembroke and Peterhouse, had among its members men whom John Foxe termed 'the godly learned in Christ' ('Acts and Monuments', 5.415), including Edward Crome (who was a fellow with Shaxton) and John Skip (later chaplain to Anne Boleyn). The royal physician William Butts (an influential advocate of reform at court) was also a Gonville man. Shaxton's devotion to his college remained a great constant throughout his life. 
Shaxton was a prompt supporter of Henry VIII's divorce from Katherine of Aragon, and was one of Anne Boleyn's most important proteges. In early 1530 Bishop Richard Nix of Norwich began to raise a new alarm about the growing availability of erroneous books, and in particular he complained of Gonville men who gave every appearance of holiness but in actuality savoured of heresy. Working in partnership with Archbishop William Warham and other conservative bishops Nix moved to suppress unorthodox preaching. Crome was among the first troubled in early 1531, but he was saved through Anne's influence, and by his own sophisticated aptitude for equivocating when tightly cornered, an ability Shaxton and many other reformers also cultivated. In August, Nix burnt Thomas Bilney (who had converted Hugh Latimer as well as many others at the university). His suspicions had also been aroused by Shaxton, who had been 'very sore suspected of many men' for his sermons and possession of heretical books ('Acts and Monuments', 4.680). 
None of Shaxton's sermon notes survive, and for much of his career it is possible only to make inferences about the nature of his opinions. Certainly he stood with many of the early reformers in supporting the primacy of scripture, and in impugning traditional tenets including purgatory, and eventually transubstantiation. According to Nix's hostile description, Shaxton had preached 'ad clerum' in Cambridge on Ash Wednesday 1531 that it was wrong to assert publicly that there was no purgatory, but not damnable to think so privately. Aghast, Nix (according to Foxe) is supposed to have said: 'Christ's Mother! I fear I have burnt Abel, and let Cain go!' ('Acts and Monuments', 4.650). But Bilney's execution had shocked the university and its officers strove to prevent any further burnings. Vice-chancellor John Watson and his assistants were willing to argue Shaxton into compliance, and they had 'much ado to bring him to forsake' his views. To avoid the scandal of an open abjuration Watson prepared a special oath for him and all candidates in theology to take, that they would never maintain or defend any errors by Wycliffe, Hus, or Luther ('Acts and Monuments', 4.680). Eventually a panel of divines attested that they found Shaxton to be 'a good catholyke man' ('Acts and Monuments', 5, appx 17, no. 1). The following year, without too much publicity, Latimer also had to retract some of the positions he had preached. 
In the fluid circumstances of these early years of doctrinal experimentation Shaxton's troubles only enhanced his reputation among other reformers, and by the beginning of 1534 he had risen to become Queen Anne's almoner. The court had rapidly become a testing ground for doctrinal change with Henry's supremacy over the English church. In Anne's evangelical household religious discussion was a fixture, especially at dinners, and the supreme head himself sometimes engaged in debates and arguments. During Lent 1534 Archbishop Thomas Cranmer introduced Shaxton (whom he accounted 'my old acquainted friend') and Latimer onto the court's preaching schedule, which may have been Shaxton's first formal speaking essay under the king's eye ('Miscellaneous Writings', 309). Some time later, teamed with Latimer, Shaxton entered into a debate against the king and Sir James Boleyn (the queen's uncle) on a question of scripture (possibly on purgatory) which was so spirited that Henry later wrote out 'dyverse epistelles' on the matter ('William Latymer's chronicklle', 62). 
Through Anne's influence Shaxton gained a series of ecclesiastical preferments, including a canonry in St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster. Early in 1535 he was made bishop of Salisbury (royal assent 5 March, temporalities restored 1 April, consecration 11 April), and Latimer was raised to Worcester when their Italian predecessors were deprived. Anne lent each of them $200 to pay for their first fruits and tenths, which was still owed at her execution the following year. In May 1536, a few days after her death, Shaxton wrote to Thomas Cromwell in desperation, pleading with him to continue her work in advancing the honour of God and his holy word. Within his new diocese he was active in promoting the reading of the 'Bible' in the vernacular, and was also a strong advocate of preaching. In Holbein's title-page for Coverdale's 'Bible' of 1535, as well as the elaborate woodcut that graces the title-page of the 'Great Bible' of 1539, Shaxton is portrayed standing shoulder to shoulder with his brother bishops Cranmer and Latimer as they receive holy scripture from the hand of the king. 
Shaxton's reputation for advancing reform spread far beyond his own diocese. During the northern risings of the autumn of 1536 rebels cited him with the other bishops of recent promotion as having subverted the faith of Christ. The political realities of the later 1530s kept him (and all bishops) highly dependent upon the goodwill of Cromwell (especially in his capacity as vicegerent for spiritual matters), and ultimately, upon the king. But Shaxton's relations with Cromwell were continually strained. His letters never shared the confidence with which Latimer approached Cromwell, and his tenure as bishop was contentious even for a reformer, and probably high-handed. He quarrelled with the inhabitants of Salisbury as he tried to impose his authority over them, exacerbating long-term disagreements concerning episcopal influence over civic jurisdiction. They countered by calling him a heretic they trusted to see hanged. Eventually Cromwell complained that Shaxton had a stomach more meet for an emperor than a bishop. He had little credit left at court in 1539 when he proved unwilling to work for the passage of the six articles through parliament, in that dangerous period as Henry's tolerance for doctrinal innovation waned. 
The cornerstone of the six articles was the act's defence of the mass and the real presence, and its tacit assumption that private masses assisted the departed in purgatory. Its promotion by the king was a setback for reformers. In addition Shaxton's reluctance to support the measure was probably dominated by an urgent personal factor, for some time before 1539 he had married. The act also prohibited clerical marriage and upheld vows of chastity, and lapses were considered felonies, punishable by death. As in the case of Cranmer, the details of Shaxton's marriage are almost completely shrouded in the obscurity that made the match possible. In his Ash Wednesday sermon of 1531 he had tested the issue of clerical celibacy by arguing that no man could maintain chastity only by prayer and fasting without God's help. In 1538 he tried to promote a married man as divinity lecturer at Reading Abbey, over the strenuous objections of the abbot. Although many reformers prompted Cromwell to permit clerical marriage, or secretly took wives, the issue remained clouded. Shaxton's marriage therefore had always represented a calculated risk, and from the passage of the 'Act of Six Articles' in 1539 it was a positive danger. 
Shaxton and Latimer resigned their sees in July 1539. So shocking and unfamiliar did it seem for bishops to relinquish their dioceses that Shaxton had to ask Cromwell if he should still dress like a bishop, and Crome had to defend them in his London sermons against the hostile popular conclusion that they had surrendered their honour with their dignities. On the continent Melanchthon wrote to Henry in protest against the six articles and praised their bravery. For some months Shaxton was held in ward at Chew by Bishop John Clerk of Bath and Wells. In December he and Latimer were each granted an annuity of 100 marks. 
Following his resignation Shaxton's career entered an almost complete eclipse. Initially his movements were restricted, and his preaching prohibited. By 1542, due to the good auspices of Cranmer, he obtained a haven at Hadleigh in Suffolk, an ecclesiastical peculiar belonging to the diocese of Canterbury. Foxe referred to Hadleigh as seeming more like 'a university of the learned' than the clothmaking town it was in actuality ('Acts and Monuments', 6.677), due in no small measure to the energy and effectiveness of its spiritual leaders, who included Bilney (who had preached there), Thomas Rose, and especially its rector, Rowland Taylor. In all likelihood Hadleigh's real circumstances may have been less glowing than Foxe would have his readers believe, for (as elsewhere) those townspeople sympathetic to reform probably constituted only a committed core among the rest. Nevertheless Shaxton could count upon those with connections to the archbishop's household, and Hadleigh provided an astonishing measure of security for his family. In 1539 Cranmer had very sensibly sent his wife, Margaret, for safety to her relatives on the continent, but neither Shaxton nor Taylor (who had also married before 1539 and served in Cranmer's employ) seem to have followed his example. Shaxton and his wife had at least three children. 
Shaxton's next crisis occurred in 1546, when intense new struggles over doctrine developed in the waning months of the king's life. In April, Crome embarked on a series of London sermons that implicitly attacked the six articles by impugning the efficacy of votive masses, which could not, he argued, relieve the souls of the dead. As Crome came under heavy pressure to recant Shaxton and Latimer came to his aid, urging him not to retract his opinions. And Shaxton backed Crome with a sermon of his own in London at the beginning of June, denying the presence of Christ's body in the sacrament of the altar. Conservative opponents used this controversy to initiate a purge of reformers at court and in many parts of the country. 
Shaxton was arrested and condemned to be burnt. Then a panel of theologians was sent to persuade him, with even greater success than in 1531. He accepted the six articles with no further reservations, and wrote an abject letter of apology to the king. As part of his submission he was sent to persuade Anne Askew, who had similarly denied the real presence. She told him that 'it had been good for him never to have been born' ('Acts and Monuments', 5.547), and he presided when she was burnt with three others in Smithfield on 16 July. Two weeks later he appeared at Paul's Cross to recant formally, weeping copiously for his errors. It was about this time that he put away his wife. In November his reconciliation to the regime became complete when the king gave him a new licence to preach. 
From 1546 Shaxton's alienation from reform was total. He never retracted this recantation, he never apologized to his former allies, he was not reconciled with his wife, and he remained conservative in opinion for the rest of his life. Under Edward VI he seemed like a dangerous backslider to the new protestant regime, and he was the focus of many vituperative printed attacks, by John Bale (who said he fell from Christ) among others. The most damaging one, edited by Robert Crowley, carried an anonymous letter of criticism by Taylor, and even the simple rhyming admonition against sexual incontinence that Shaxton had written to his wife when he had separated from her. '
Voyde euil thoughtes, studie in scripture 

Kepe thine eye, ill company eschue 

Least delite and desire them do ensue. 
(Crowley, sig. A4'r')' 

Under Mary, Shaxton's position improved. In 1555 he received a pardon from Cardinal Reginald Pole for his illicit marriage and the heresies he had encouraged under Henry VIII. In the same year he became suffragan to Bishop Thomas Thirlby of Ely. Again he acted as examiner, and tried to persuade others to follow his example. 'Good brethren', he counselled William Wolsey and Robert Pygot of Wisbech in a futile effort to keep them from the stake, 'remember yourselves, and become new men, for I myself was in this fond opinion that you are now in, but I am now become a new man' ('Acts and Monuments', 7.404). At Cambridge the university's habitual protectiveness ensured that there was only one execution there, at Easter 1556 of John Hullier, whose examination Shaxton led at Great St Mary's Church. To protestants these martyrdoms amplified the irony of Shaxton's apostasy. 
Gonville Hall figured large in Shaxton's will of 5 August 1556, along with a weighty secret. His final benefactions to the college included his books, the hangings of green say in his chamber, and a house in Cambridge that he was in the midst of buying at the time of his death. Its income he wanted used 'to solace the compagnie at home' each Christmas. And he instructed his Hadleigh servant Thomas Alabaster to ensure that the residue of his estate was to go to one Thomas Dartsab, the curious name (bastard spelled backwards) hinting at the desperate and even poignant contrivances necessary to cope with the embarrassing fact that the one-time bishop had a son. His two daughters, perhaps already married to Hadleigh men and provided for, were not mentioned. Shaxton had died by 9 August, when his will was proved, and according to his wishes his body was interred in the chapel of Gonville Hall. In modern times the college has reinvigorated his bequest in the form of a holiday dinner for the fellows and their spouses. 


@@@@@


doc= 25277


Shea, David (1777-1836), orientalist, son of Daniel Shea, a farmer, was born in co. Limerick. Shea, whose forename is given in some sources as Daniel, entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 3 June 1793, and in 1797 obtained a scholarship in classics. While at university he joined the Society of United Irishmen. In April 1797 Lord Clare, vice-chancellor of the university, held a visitation, at which he required the students to take an oath that they would inform against any whom they knew to be connected with the society. Shea refused to comply and was expelled from the university. 
Shea went to England, and obtained a mastership in a private school. His knowledge of Italian soon obtained for him the post of chief clerk in a large mercantile establishment at Malta. While there he mastered Arabic, acquiring a knowledge not only of the classical language but also of the chief current dialects. A project on the part of his employers to open a factory on the east coast of the Black Sea led him also to study Persian. When the firm was compelled to withdraw altogether from the Levant he was recalled to England. There he made the acquaintance of Adam Clarke, who found him employment as a private tutor in the house of a Dr Laurell, and afterwards procured for him an assistant professorship in the oriental department of the East India College at Haileybury. 
Shea was made a member of the committee of the newly formed Oriental Translation Fund. He translated two books from Persian. The first was Mirkhond's work under the title 'History of the Early Kings of Persia', published in London in 1832. The second, 'The Dabistan, or, School of manners', was unfinished at the time of his death, and was completed by Anthony Troyer. Shea died at the East India College on 11 May 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 25278


Sheaffe, Sir Roger Hale, baronet (1763-1851), army officer, born at Boston, Massachusetts, on 15 July 1763, was the third son of William Sheaffe, deputy collector of HM customs at Boston, and his wife, Susannah, eldest daughter of Thomas Child of Boston. As a boy, Sheaffe became the protege of Hugh Percy, Earl Percy (later second duke of Northumberland), who during the American War of Independence had his headquarters in Boston in the boarding house run by Sheaffe's widowed mother. Percy sent Sheaffe to sea, then transferred him to Lochee's military academy, Chelsea, and subsequently bought most of Sheaffe's commissions. On 1 May 1778, through Percy's influence, Sheaffe received an ensigncy, and on 27 December 1780 a lieutenancy in the 5th foot, of which Percy was colonel. He served in Ireland from January 1781 to May 1787, and in Canada from July 1787 to September 1797. Under orders from Guy Carleton, first Baron Dorchester, who had been instructed by Lieutenant-Governor John Graves Simcoe, he was sent in 1794 to protest against certain settlements made by the Americans on Indian land on the south shore of Lake Ontario. On 5 May 1795 he obtained his company in the 5th foot and on 13 December 1797 a majority in the 81st; on 22 March 1798 he became lieutenant-colonel in the 49th, but he seems to have become unpopular with the men. He served in the Netherlands from August to November 1799, in the expedition to the Baltic from March to July 1801, and in Canada from September 1802 to October 1811. He was promoted brevet colonel on 25 April 1808, and major-general on 4 June 1811. He married, on 29 January 1810, Margaret, daughter of John Coffin of Quebec, and cousin of Admiral Sir Isaac Coffin, bt. They had two sons and four daughters, all of whom predeceased Sheaffe. His wife died at Bath on 1 May 1855. He again served in Canada from 29 July 1812 to November 1813. On 13 October 1812 United States troops took Queenstown on the Niagara, but on the same day Sheaffe, on the death of General Sir Isaac Brock, assuming command of the British forces, recaptured the town, the Americans losing heavily. On 27 April 1813 he defended the town of York (later Toronto), when the losses of the Americans in taking the place exceeded the total numbers of those opposed to them. Heavily outnumbered, Sheaffe withdrew his force; probably a sound decision, but much criticized. He continued to command in the upper province, cautiously declining to take risks, and to administer its government until June 1813 (when he was replaced by Major-General Francis de Rottenburg), and on retirement was praised by the executive council. He had lost the confidence of his superior officer, Lieutenant-General Sir George Prevost, and so was recalled to England, leaving in November 1813. 
On 16 January 1813 Sheaffe was made a baronet for his victory at Queenstown, and further rewarded by being made colonel of the 36th on 20 December 1829, and promoted to general on 28 June 1838. He had a residence at Edswale, co. Clare, but from 1817 lived largely in Edinburgh, where he died on 17 July 1851, when his title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 25279


Henry Sheares (1753-1798), Irish nationalist, was also tutored at Glasheen before enrolling in Trinity in November 1773. Henry Sheares inherited the bulk of the family estate in May 1776 and resigned his commission in the 51st foot on half pay after three years' service. 


@@@@@


doc= 25280


Sheares, John (1766-1798), Irish nationalist, was born at Goldenbush, co. Cork, the fourth son of Henry Sheares (died 1776), banker and MP, and Jane Anne Bettesworth (died 1803) of Glasheen, co. Cork. He spent his early years at Glasheen and almost died in a swimming accident that claimed the life of his elder brother Robert, a tragedy for which he felt responsible. Two other brothers, Richard and Christopher, died in the 1770s when serving with the military in the West Indies. John Sheares was educated at home as a boy and then by the Revd G. Lee of Cork, who prepared him to enter Trinity College, Dublin. His eldest brother, 
John Sheares inherited $3000 from his father but did not manage the cash well. His mother's will records an advance of $500 to her 'late dear unfortunate son, John Sheares, as part of his provision when he came of age upon his being under some difficulties' (Madden, 3.199). He attended Trinity as a sixteen-year-old in 1783, graduated BA in 1787, and was called in 1788 to the Irish bar, where he was joined within a year by Henry. The brothers lodged in Dublin on Ormond Quay, along with Alicia Swete (1757-1791), with whom Henry Sheares had eloped in August 1782, and their four children. Their marriage allegedly incensed rival suitor John FitzGibbon, earl of Clare. R. R. Madden ascertained that John Sheares's affair with a Mrs White in 1791 produced a daughter, Louisa, who was adopted by her relatives. 
The death of Alicia Sheares on 11 December 1791 occasioned the removal of three of her children to France by their maternal grandmother. The Sheares brothers consequently visited Paris in 1792, where they engaged in political debates and met leading revolutionaries such as Brissot and Roland. In November 1792 Henry and John Sheares signed a document which called for close co-operation between the governments of Ireland, Britain, and France. The reputation of John Sheares later proved vulnerable to allegations that he was a fanatical Francophile who had taken a lugubrious interest in the revolutionary experience. Daniel O'Connell claimed that Sheares had once brandished a handkerchief said to have been stained with the blood of Louis XVI. Factual errors in O'Connell's anecdote were highlighted by Madden while other admirers insisted that John Sheares was deeply moved by the fate of Marie Antoinette and wept at Louis's trial. There is little doubt, however, but that the brothers were fervent supporters of the ideals of the French Revolution and attended the execution of the king on 21 January 1793 just days before leaving Calais for home. 
After returning to Dublin John Sheares moved into 128 Baggot Street, a house leased by his brother in March 1792. Prior to the French sojourn the only overt signs of the radicalism for which John Sheares became notorious were several patriotic poems written when a teenager. This changed about June 1793 when the brothers joined the Society of United Irishmen to campaign for Catholic emancipation and other far-reaching democratic reforms. Both quickly attained prominence in the elite Dublin society and chaired meetings in 1793-4, profiles indicative of prior acquaintance with the leaders of what remained a small, legal, middle-class organization. Many of the most determined United Irishmen were barristers and the legal practice of John Sheares suffered more than most once his political inclinations were revealed. The principal reason for this seems to have been the extreme hostility of Clare, a formidable opponent who freely used the powers invested in his office as lord chancellor to combat the United Irishmen. 
Clare set his sights on the Sheares brothers on 18 July 1793 when he alluded to them in the Irish House of Lords as 'two persons who were members of the French Jacobin Club... in the pay of that society, to foment sedition' (Kavanaugh, 288). Henry Sheares penned a robust handbill refutation of this attack and the ill will arising from the exchange had not diminished when John Sheares came close to locking horns with Clare in a controversy centred on Simon Butler. On 16 August 1793 John Sheares chaired the meeting which voted an address to Butler and Oliver Bond on their release from prison. He was angered by the chancellor's reiterated views on Butler's disloyalty and offered to deliver a verbal demand for either an apology or a duel. Fortunately for Sheares, the impropriety of engaging him on this errand led to his substitution by the more tactful Archibald Hamilton Rowan in early October. John Sheares had already acted as second to his barrister colleague and fellow United Irishman Leonard McNally in a politically motivated duel with Sir Jonah Barrington in April 1793. 
In 1794 John Sheares became romantically linked to a Maria Steele of Merrion Square, daughter of the deceased Sir R. Parker Steele. This remained a secret from her mother until 1798 when Lady Steele registered her opposition to marriage owing to John's irreligiousness. His gravitation towards the more militant faction of United Irishmen may be inferred from his presence at the funeral of the Revd William Jackson in May 1795. Jackson's offer of French military aid to the United Irishmen had resulted in the banning of the society in May 1794 and the resignation of most moderates. John Sheares, though probably not a member of the inner circle of senior activists who transformed the movement into an underground, paramilitary organization, was privy to their general plans. Henry Sheares also remained active and, as William Drennan noted in October 1794, devised the scheme to reorganize the United Irishmen as a secret, cellular body. In late 1794 or early 1795 Henry Sheares met Sarah Neville of Mary Mount, Kilkenny (sister of Sir Robert Hudson), whom he married; they had two children prior to 1798. He may then have distanced himself from the day-to-day affairs of the Dublin organization but by March 1798 was once again conspiring with his more radical brother. 
The supposed weakness of the conspiracy in the Cork region in 1798 has been attributed to the incompetence of the Sheares brothers, but recent scholarship indicates that the region failed to revolt for reasons that arose after their arrest. The main role fulfilled by John Sheares after October 1797 was to contribute articles to the radical 'Press' newspaper using the pen-name Dion. Edited by Cork republican Arthur O'Connor, the paper became the main organ of the United Irishmen until its suppression in March 1798. John Sheares proved a skilled propagandist and may have authored several seditious documents in the advent of the 1798 rising. He reputedly considered going to France as an emissary in 1797 but this offer was rejected if ever made. The theory that his youth was at issue is highly unlikely, as is the story that professional hardship arising from Clare's persecution disposed him to contemplate emigration in December 1797. Extant evidence points to John Sheares's deepening ideological commitment and increasing influence within the movement. In the early months of 1798 the brothers joined William Lawless in subverting Irish militiamen based at Lehaunstown, co. Dublin. Neutralizing this reserve camp became more important during the spring when coercion made deep inroads into United Irish arms stocks and personnel. 
The arrest of most of the United Irish leadership at Oliver Bond's on 12 March 1798 thrust John Sheares into the first echelon of the revolutionary leadership. He was not entirely trusted by the tight-knit coterie headed by Lord Edward Fitzgerald and Samuel Neilson but was a 'de facto' member of the new directory. His presence in Cork on seditious business was in April 1798 made known to the authorities, who neglected to act at that time. He also attended spring assizes at Wexford and Kildare where he conferred with senior United Irishmen under the cover of legal affairs. On 10 May John Sheares was introduced to Captain John Warneford Armstrong of the King's county militia in the Grafton Street premises of radical bookseller Patrick Byrne. Armstrong feigned disloyalty during this chance encounter and aroused the interest of Sheares, who was anxious to strengthen the United Irish grip on his regiment. Mass defections from the military then featured strongly in United Irish strategy as it offered an alternative to French assistance. John Sheares hoped that republican soldiers would spearhead an irresistible 'coup d'etat' in the capital and obviate the need for the more risky national insurrection favoured by Neilson. Such tactical arguments led to a fissure between John Sheares and Neilson in early May and his isolation from the leadership. When John Sheares called to visit Lawless on 21 May he was arrested by Town Major Henry Charles Sirr, who had been searching the house on the basis of information supplied by Armstrong. Henry Sheares was then seized in Baggot Street by Alderman Alexander just two days before the planned uprising. 
The brothers were questioned in Dublin Castle by their unsympathetic relative Lord Shannon, who noted that they 'would confess nothing but were much frightened' ('Lord Shannon's Letters', 98). They were committed to Kilmainham prison until 4 July, when they were both arraigned on charges of high treason before Chief Justice Carleton. McNally, a government double agent when ostensibly Henry Sheares's friend and defence lawyer, helped ensure the conviction of his client on 12-13 July by insisting that he be tried alongside the more incriminated John. The younger Sheares anticipated capital conviction and prepared farewell letters ahead of the trial. Armstrong's willingness to prosecute gave the government a strong case, as did their possession of an inflammatory document attributed to John Sheares which had been intended for distribution after the insurrection commenced. He privately acknowledged authorship on the eve of his death but it is unclear whether the proclamation had been sanctioned by the directory. John Philpot Curran, the main defence lawyer, could do little to undermine such clear-cut evidence and his motion to adjourn was dismissed by Attorney-General John Toler. 
The brothers were found guilty on the morning of 13 July and committed to Newgate prison to await execution the following day. The capital conviction of Henry Sheares surprised many and it was held that an appeal might well succeed. Nothing came of this as there was insufficient time to prepare a case between sentencing and the prompt execution date of the following afternoon. Barrington acknowledged receiving an overdue letter from Henry at 11 a.m. on 14 July and, as directed by his desperate college friend, showed it to Clare. Assent was received that Henry's life would be spared if he co-operated with the authorities but Barrington reached Newgate too late to furnish the stay of execution. It is extremely doubtful whether Sheares would have accepted such terms and he presumably hoped to delay proceedings long enough for the verdict to be challenged on a point of law. 
John and Henry Sheares appeared dressed in black at about three o'clock on 14 July and advanced hand in hand to the public gallows outside Newgate. Their heads were removed after death and, in a rare gesture for the period, the bodies were surrendered to a family member, Brent Neville, to be laid out in St Michan's crypt, Dublin, the same day. John Sheares was survived by his daughter, Louisa, Henry by his widow and six children, Henry, Richard Benjamin, Alicia, Jane, Garrett, and Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 25281


Shearman, William (1767-1861), physician and medical writer, born at Harwich in January 1767, graduated MD at Edinburgh on 12 September 1807 (with a dissertation on pneumonia), and was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London, on 11 April 1808. In 1799 he had been appointed one of the staff of a periodical called 'The New Medical and Physical Journal, or, Annals of Medicine, Natural History, and Chemistry', and from 1810 to 1812 he was its editor. He continued his connection with the publication until 1815. Shearman contributed articles on a variety of topics to 'Medical Reports' in 1824 and also published independently. 
Shearman commenced practice as a physician in London, and then worked for a while in Maidstone before returning to London in 1813. He practised for many years in Northampton Square, Clerkenwell, and subsequently, until his death, at 17 Canonbury Villas, Islington. He was physician to the London Dispensary from 1813 to 1824, to the Infirmary for Children in Waterloo Road from 1816, and to the West London Infirmary and Lying-in Institution in Villiers Street from 1821. He was the senior member of the medical staff when the institution in Villiers Street became the Charing Cross Hospital, and he retained his position in the new hospital until 1852, when he became consulting physician. He gave annual lectures on the theory and practice of medicine at the Charing Cross Hospital school of medicine. 
For several years Shearman was treasurer to the Medical Society of London. In 1824 he was president of the society, and in 1834 he published an oration delivered before it. Shearman was survived by at least two daughters, but the identity of his wife and any other family is not known. He died at his home on 21 November 1861, at the age of ninety-four, and was buried at Highgate cemetery in north London. Described by an obituarist as 'quite one of the old school of physicians [who] set his face strongly against the 'new-fangled doctrines' of modern times' ('Lancet', 536), he was nevertheless so respected that all lectures and teaching at Charing Cross medical school were suspended on 29 November, the day of his funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 25282


Shebbeare, John (1709-1788), physician and political writer, was the eldest son of an attorney and corn-factor of Bideford, Devon. Unfortunately very little is known of his family history, parents, and early career, although the Shebbeares had once been modest landowners in the south of the county. 
Shebbeare was educated at the free school at Exeter under the tuition of Zachariah Mudge, and at fifteen or sixteen he was apprenticed to an Exeter surgeon. Shebbeare's father died soon after, leaving the family in very poor circumstances. Friends assisted his mother in maintaining the corn-factoring business for some time, but it failed, and she was removed to the king's bench prison, where she died. During his apprenticeship, Shebbeare specialized in obstetrics and developed a keen interest in chemistry, but perhaps because of financial necessity he did not wait to take a medical degree before attempting to establish a practice of his own, probably in Exeter. Shebbeare was married young, possibly in 1733, to a woman of a genteel background but with little fortune. They had three children, a boy and two girls. His wife, whose name is unknown, died on 25 November 1779. Shebbeare inherited little from his father, and his medical practice did not prosper. It was reported that Shebbeare's declining fortune was caused by the alienation of his former master and of many of the citizens, corporation, and magistrates of Exeter, who were the victims of his vindictive temper and predilection for literary satire, and by futile alchemical experiments. 
In 1736 Shebbeare moved to Bristol and went into partnership with a chemist. Virtually nothing is known of his life in Bristol, although he probably attempted to continue with his medical career or worked as an apothecary. In 1740 he printed a treatise upon the medicinal properties of the Bristol waters. It was during this period that Shebbeare's close involvement in politics began, and the forging of connections with the tory-patriots of the city is suggested by the publication of an epitaph on the Bristol MP Thomas Coster, who died in 1739. It appears that Shebbeare moved to London about 1750, and briefly visited Paris during 1752, where he claimed to have earned a medical degree and to have been elected to the French Academy of Sciences. 
Shebbeare's career as a writer commenced with a work inspired by the passage of the 'Marriage Act' in 1753. The legislation, promoted by the whig lord chancellor, the earl of Hardwicke, had been drafted to prevent clandestine marriages by requiring that persons below the legal age of consent obtain the permission of their parents or legal guardians before marrying. In 1754 Shebbeare published 'The Marriage Act', a novel which inveighed against Hardwicke's reforms by dramatizing their pernicious impact upon the lives of aspiring young lovers whose passions had been sanctioned by God but were frustrated by tyrannical, acquisitive parents, guardians, and their legal minions, who coerced them into marrying for the social and financial aggrandizement of their families. In condemning the moral and social consequences of the act, Shebbeare also accused the whig ministry of blatantly espousing the class interests of the elite in attempting to prohibit marriages between members of unequal social stations. The ministry was angered by Shebbeare's criticism, and several days after the novel's appearance he was arrested for the aspersions he had cast upon parliament. Shebbeare was released soon after, upon condition that he appear before the courts at certain intervals as a guarantee of future good behaviour. 
In 1755 Shebbeare published a second novel, 'Lydia', a sentimental tale of the sufferings of a virtuous young woman who endures poverty and persecution before marrying her lover and retiring to a life of piety and philanthropy. The novel is perhaps most memorable for its depiction of an Iroquois chief, who travels from New York to London to discover whether the inhabitants of England are as degenerate as the British American colonists who oppress his people. Shebbeare's Cannassatego, the courageous, honourable warrior-chief, reflects the era's fascination with romantic primitivism and represents one of the most positive portrayals of the native North American in eighteenth-century fiction. Although it is not a political novel, hostility towards the whig administration emerges throughout the narrative, most clearly in the figure of Cannassatego, an ostensibly objective observer, whose bitter disillusionment with the selfish materialism and political venality of Hanoverian England echoes the views of his creator. The composition of 'Lydia' coincided with the escalation of territorial conflict between Britain and France in North America during 1754-5, and Shebbeare employed the novel to denounce the prime minister, the duke of Newcastle, for failing to defend British imperial interests from French aggression. 
Shebbeare's growing engagement with politics during the 1750s was emphasized by a work of social and political satire also published in 1755. 'Letters on the English Nation' was an epistolary fiction allegedly written by an Anglicized Italian Jesuit, whose long residence in England and analytical nature had endowed him with the insight and neutrality to develop a sweeping analysis of the decline of the English constitution, morals, manners, and culture under the corrupt rule of the whigs. The selection of a Jesuit as a narrative persona encouraged allegations that Shebbeare was a Jacobite at heart, prompting the whig antiquary Thomas Birch to revile the 'Letters' as 'a Book, which an Englishman and a Protestant must detest' (BL, Add. MS 35398, fol. 255). 
As the international crisis of 1755-6 developed into war between Britain and France, Shebbeare's political commitment increased, inspiring the composition of a series of pamphlets condemning the Newcastle ministry's management of the conflict, beginning with 'A Letter to the People of England', published in the autumn of 1755. Shebbeare accused the ministry of sacrificing British maritime and colonial interests in North America by slavishly pandering to the Hanoverian partialities of George II. He developed this theme in his later 'Letters', reinforcing his charges with a historical survey stretching back to the reign of William III to illustrate the damage inflicted upon Britain by the predilection of alien monarchs for their homelands. Moreover, Shebbeare charged that the whigs had connived in the bloody, expensive continental wars of William III and George II as a means of establishing their grasp upon political power. 
Admiral John Byng's failure to save the Mediterranean island of Minorca from capture by the French in July 1756 precipitated an intense political controversy over the responsibility for the defeat. Shebbeare's 'Fourth Letter', published in August, formulated a scathing review of the Newcastle administration's European diplomacy and conduct of the war in North America, and blamed the loss of Minorca upon the neglect and incompetence of the ministers. Shebbeare may also have written several pamphlets in defence of Byng, denouncing the ministry for attempting to conceal its blunders by scapegoating the admiral. 
Shebbeare's political journalism received stinging criticism from the era's leading literary reviewers, who disapproved of the violence of his anti-ministerial attacks. Shebbeare's feud with Ralph Griffiths, the editor of the 'Monthly Review', had begun in 1755, when Griffiths printed a critical account of a treatise Shebbeare had written describing the discoveries of his years of medical research. The article dismissed Shebbeare's study for its arrogance, plagiarism, and ignorance, and openly questioned his claim to a medical degree. Of a combative temper and sensitive to any criticism, Shebbeare had retaliated by satirizing Griffiths in 'Lydia', and the quarrel continued with the 'Monthly''s censure of the 'Letters'. In commenting upon Shebbeare's pamphlets, Tobias Smollett, the editor of the 'Critical Review', was especially incensed by what he saw as their author's irresponsible fomenting of mob violence and civil dissension for pecuniary motives at a time when all Britons should unite against the common enemy. He denounced Shebbeare as a desperate incendiary without principles, talent, or common discretion. Shebbeare replied to his new adversary in May 1757 with 'The Occasional Critic', containing virulent abuse of Smollett's character and writings. The clash between the two authors degenerated into one of the eighteenth century's most bitter and brutally fought literary quarrels. Shebbeare was caricatured by Smollett in the novel 'Sir Lancelot Greaves' (1760) as the misanthropic Ferret, an unscrupulous, self-serving political agitator and quack doctor who represents one of the most memorable minor characters in Smollett's fiction. 
Shebbeare published a 'Sixth Letter' in late 1757. It comprised one of his most blatant and extreme expressions of the malignant effects of the Hanoverian succession. Its notorious motto, alluding to the white horse of the Hanoverian coat of arms, was taken from 'Revelation' 6:8, 'And I looked, and beheld a pale Horse: and his name that sat upon him was Death, and Hell followed him'. In 1756-7 the vulnerability of Hanover to French attacks had compelled the government to establish an alliance with Prussia and to finance the formation of an army for its defence. Now the ministry feared that Shebbeare's anti-Hanoverianism would increase the unpopularity of such controversial measures. Eager to stifle Shebbeare's persistent criticism, the ministry issued a general warrant for his arrest in January 1758. Shebbeare was taken into custody, and a seventh letter, which was being prepared for publication, was suppressed. Shebbeare was tried before the court of king's bench, and on 17 June 1758 he was convicted of seditious libel. The chief justice, Lord Mansfield, presided over the trial and, in interpreting the laws governing the press, ruled that satires upon dead kings were libellous. Mansfield's severe judgment offended many advocates of the liberty of the press, and prompted Horace Walpole's condemnation that it amounted to the censorship of history. On 28 November, Shebbeare was sentenced to pay a $5 fine, to serve a term of three years' imprisonment, to provide securities of good behaviour for seven years amounting to $1000, and to stand in the pillory at Charing Cross. The defiance Shebbeare exhibited during the execution of the last part of his punishment, aided and abetted by a tory political ally, the under-sheriff of Middlesex, Arthur Beardmore, provoked a political scandal. Shebbeare's allies had distributed a handbill around London 'inviting the friends of the liberty of the press, and of Old England... to see the British champion' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 3.40). Shebbeare drove into Charing Cross on 5 December 1758 not in a prisoner's cart but in an elegant coach, and was greeted with three cheers by a large crowd of spectators. Rather than submit to the indignity of having his head, arms, and legs confined within the pillory, Shebbeare stood at his ease, while an Irish chairman held an umbrella over his head to shield him from the sun. Occasionally, when tired, he put his hands upon the holes of the pillory in order to rest. 
William Hogarth recorded the disapproval of many contemporaries towards the extravagant virulence of Shebbeare's political polemic, his twisting of the facts, and the inflammatory nature of his rhetoric. In 'The Polling' (1758), the third plate of Hogarth's 'Election' series, Shebbeare, in leg irons, is depicted whispering seditious nonsense into the ear of an idiot, who is being sworn in as a voter. Shebbeare's enemies poured scorn upon his pretensions to political popularity and his attempt to transform the disgrace of his pillorying into a triumph. In 'The Author' (1763) the whig poet Charles Churchill wrote: '
Where is SHEBBEARE? O, let not foul reproach, 

Travelling thither in a City-Coach, 

The Pill'ry dare to name; the whole intent 

Of that Parade was Fame, not Punishment, 

And that old, staunch Whig BEARDMORE standing by, 

Can in full Court give the report the lye. 
(p. 15)' Shebbeare served the full term of his sentence, and the financial strain it caused inflicted considerable hardship upon his family. He fell into debt and felt deserted by his political allies. At one time he became seriously ill. Shebbeare felt particularly resentful towards William Pitt, whom he had eulogized in 'The Third Letter' for his patriotic opposition to Newcastle's diplomatic efforts to secure the safety of Hanover during 1755-6. Pitt was in coalition with Newcastle when Shebbeare was prosecuted, and the doctor blamed Pitt for failing to shield him from punishment despite having, as he claimed, 'contributed not a little towards creating the popularity, and thereby to the elevation of Lord Chatham to the seat of prime minister' (Shebbeare, 36). Shebbeare's difficult term in the king's bench cannot have been improved by the arrival of his adversary Smollett in 1760, who was himself imprisoned for libel. 
While in prison Shebbeare continued to support himself by his writings. He accepted subscriptions for an ambitious but unpublished history of England. He appears to have been the author of several pamphlets in defence of Lord George Sackville, who was accused of cowardice for his behaviour during the battle of Minden in 1759. Shebbeare continued to follow politics and the progress of the war closely, and after his disillusionment with Pitt he became a supporter of the prince of Wales, later George III, and Lord Bute, who shared his opposition to British participation in the German war and advocacy of peace. During this time Shebbeare worked upon the composition of his most elaborate work, an allegorical history of Britain since the revolution of 1688, documenting the subversion of the constitution and the decadence of English society and culture under the tyranny of William III, the Hanoverians, and the whigs. 'The History of the Sumatrans', first published in 1760, concluded with a glowing panegyric upon George III and Bute, who were celebrated for restoring their people's political rights and liberties. True religion, moral virtue, artistic excellence, and economic prosperity are nourished by the beneficent reign of the young king and his adviser. Shebbeare's support was appreciated by the court, and he was rewarded with a pension of $200 in 1764 when the tory Sir John Philips applied to George III upon his behalf. When granting the request, it was reported that the king 'was pleased to speak of him in very favourable terms' ('European Magazine', 13.87). From that time, Shebbeare distinguished himself as a loyal and energetic supporter of George III and his ministers in pamphlets and newspaper articles, replying to John Wilkes and defending Lord North's American policy from the criticisms of Edmund Burke. One of Shebbeare's most significant later social and political works, 'An Essay on the Origin, Progress, and Establishment of National Society' (1776), was a reply to the writings of the nonconformist minister Richard Price, who supported the cause of the American revolutionaries. 
Shebbeare's political and literary opponents sneered at his support for the court and his acceptance of a pension, denouncing him as an opportunistic hypocrite. The poet William Mason ridiculed him in 'An Epistle to Dr. Shebbeare' (1777) as: '
The same abusive, base, abandon'd thing, 

When pilloried, or pension'd by a king 
(p. 9)' Samuel Johnson was also offered a pension by George III, and the two tory writers' names were joined together by the ministry's whig opponents in parliament. It was claimed that the administration had pensioned a He-bear and a She-bear. The boast, perhaps apocryphal, that he had embarked upon his career as a political journalist vowing 'to write himself into a place or the pillory' was frequently attributed to Shebbeare (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 3.39). His support for George III, however, the patriot-king who proudly proclaimed himself to be a Briton and the son of a Briton, was consistent with the tory-patriot political ideology he had expounded throughout his life. Although Shebbeare took advantage of the new reign to press his case for preferment, in accepting it he did not compromise his political principles. 
Unfortunately for Shebbeare, assessments of his character, writings, and political opinions were transmitted to posterity primarily by his literary and political enemies. The fact that he appears to have made few friends emerges as a telling commentary. It has been suggested that Smollett later relented in his hostility towards Shebbeare, but this seems unlikely. The evidence appears to lie in a seemingly sympathetic account of Shebbeare's prosecution and imprisonment for the 'Sixth Letter' in an edition of Smollett's 'History of England'. The inconsistency most probably was caused by the corruption of the text, and should not be taken as an indication of a change of heart on the part of its author. The passage should also not be taken out of context, in which Shebbeare's punishment is employed by the tory Smollett as an example of the severity and arbitrary nature of whig justice. 
One biographer who knew Shebbeare personally warned against the danger of judging his character from the tone of his political writings, praising him as a son, brother, husband, and father; but even he confesses that Shebbeare was quick-tempered, stubborn, immoderate, and intolerant of others' opinions. Shebbeare's marriage was apparently an unhappy one. The novelist Fanny Burney, who met Shebbeare in 1774, recorded him as declaring 'I think I have been yoked for one and forty years, and I have wished my wife under the ground any time since' ('Early Diary', 1.275). She also accused him of misogyny. Shebbeare's troubled domestic situation may be reflected in the often ambiguous attitude towards women revealed in his fiction, where the idealization of virtuous young heroines appears beside strong condemnation of female vice and folly. In addition to his political intolerance, Shebbeare was also an uncompromising high-church tory and English nationalist, his works being riddled with abuse of Quakers, Presbyterians, other dissenters, Jews, and the Scots. An egoist, Shebbeare appeared to be perpetually at war with a world which he felt did not recognize his worth as a medical man, novelist, and political commentator. The poverty and obscurity of his early life may have contributed to his sensitivity and aggressive self-assertiveness. 
Shebbeare's written works suffered from a lack of originality and the haste with which they were composed. His novels, modelled upon those of Henry Fielding, reveal these flaws in their diffuse style, rambling narratives, conventional plots, and poor construction. As a political writer, Shebbeare was also deeply indebted to others, most notably to Lord Bolingbroke, for the content of his political ideology and the form of its expression. His social satire and political commentary, however, could be energetic, cogent, and effective, as James Boswell recognized when claiming that 'whatever objections were made to him', he 'had knowledge and abilities much above the class of ordinary writers, and deserves to be remembered as a respectable name in literature, were it only for his admirable 'Letters on the English Nation'' (Boswell, 'Life', 1151). During the Seven Years' War, Shebbeare's 'Letters to the People of England' were widely read and politically influential. His emotionally charged, powerfully written patriot rhetoric contributed to the development of political discontent with the Newcastle ministry after the fall of Minorca, and encouraged the extra-parliamentary protests which helped to bring about its collapse in November 1756. There was also some foundation to Shebbeare's claim, however typically exaggerated, that he had assisted Pitt in his attempts to mobilize popular patriot support, especially among the tories. Shebbeare died in Eaton Street, Pimlico, on 1 August 1788. 


@@@@@


doc= 25283


George Darell Shee (1843-1894), born in London on 12 July 1843, was educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he graduated LLB in 1866. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 6 November 1862, and was called to the bar on 30 April 1867. He joined the south-eastern circuit, became district probate registrar for East Suffolk, and in July 1883 was appointed recorder of Hythe. He was the author of 'A Remonstrance' (1886), which was addressed to Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, in reply to his attack on Sir William Shee in a book entitled 'The League of the North and South'. On 14 October 1873 he married Jane, eldest daughter of Harry Innes of Thomastown. He died at his home, Landguard Lodge, Felixstowe, Suffolk, on 15 December 1894; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25284


Shee, Sir Martin Archer (1769-1850), portrait painter and writer, was born in Dublin on 20 December 1769, the younger surviving son of Martin Shee (1719/20-1783), merchant, and his wife, Mary (died 1771), elder daughter of John Archer of Dublin. His grandfather, George Shee of Castlebar, co. Mayo, belonged to an Irish Roman Catholic family claiming kinship with the old family of O'Shea. True or not, genealogical vanity was a trait both of Martin Shee and of the future Sir Martin Archer Shee, as was a taste for turning more or less whimsical verses, which resulted, in the case of the painter, in several tedious volumes on art in rhyming couplets. 
Shortly after the death of Shee's mother in 1771 his father left Dublin for Cookstown, co. Wicklow, where the boy and his brother George were looked after by their mother's widowed sister, Mrs McEvoy, who was already living with the family. Shee's father, who had gone blind some time before his marriage, provided his son with his early classical education. When Mrs McEvoy remarried (to a Mr Dillon) and moved to Dublin in 1781, Shee's father also moved back there. After his father's death in 1783 Shee was brought up in the Dillon household. He had by now received a year's classical education in Dublin with the Dominicans and had begun to study under Francis Robert West at the drawing academy of the Royal Dublin Society, where he won most of the premiums available and was awarded a silver palette. His dependent position persuaded him to leave home abruptly at fifteen and set up successfully as a portrait painter in crayon (pastel). By 1786 he was painting life-size portraits in oil and enjoying fashionable patronage. At this time he also developed a taste for the theatre, which he retained. In 1788, encouraged by Gilbert Stuart, Shee went to London, arriving on 29 June, and lodged in Southampton Street, Covent Garden. 
Shee was armed with recommendations to the likes of James Barry, Edmund Burke, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Benjamin West, George Romney, and John Opie, but they proved optimistic. After his death some of these introductions, his son tells us, were found undelivered among his papers, but he had made use of some, and wrote accounts of several fruitless meetings. They include a revealing description of Barry, who was discovered in considerable 'deshabille' amid the chaos of his dining-room, where he was working upon an etching after one of his own designs: 'The walls were perfectly concealed by... little statues, busts, and old pictures, besides casts of legs, arms, skulls, bones, hands, feet, sketches, prints, drawings, palettes, pencils, colours, canvases, frames... disposed in all the confusion and disorder of the most negligent carelessness. (Shee, 1.83-4)' Nothing came of this, nor of a meeting with Reynolds, who, Shee suspected, had no knowledge of the provider of his introduction. 
Shee was not in difficulties, however. He expressed his determination not to return to working in crayon, and evidently gained sufficient work as a portraitist. Indeed, he moved to larger lodgings in Craven Street, the Strand, in the autumn of 1788, and in the following spring had two portraits accepted for the Royal Academy exhibition. By this date he had already become friends with the young Thomas Lawrence, and expressed his admiration for him in letters to his brother. During this period he was befriended by the actor Alexander Pope, and also gained employment creating copies in oils which the publisher Thomas Macklin needed to engrave for his 'Gallery of the British Poets'. He was able to earn as much as 12 guineas for each of these copies at a time when Lawrence was charging 10 guineas for a portrait head. His own portraits were admired by the publisher John Boydell. 
After two years Shee's career took a decisive step forward when he got to know his cousin, Sir George Shee, an Indian nabob, who showed some of his pictures to a distinguished company at dinner in February 1790. As a result Shee obtained a second and more successful introduction to Burke and thus to Reynolds. He suffered a temporary setback when four pictures were accepted for the Royal Academy exhibition in 1790 but were not hung. In November that year, however, he entered the Royal Academy Schools and, to quote his son, 'the course of Mr. Shee's life, during the next four or five years, offers but few events of interest to the pen of the biographer' (Shee, 1.142). Shortly after he entered the schools Shee moved into an apartment in Jermyn Street previously occupied by Lawrence, whom he was eventually to succeed as president of the Royal Academy. Shee not only tended generally to follow in Lawrence's footsteps, but has also been overshadowed by his more brilliant gifts. 
Shee had no fewer than seven portraits at the Royal Academy in 1792, including 'Anthony Pasquin' and two actors, 'Alexander Pope' and 'W. T. ['Gentleman'] Lewis', who is seen in Vandyke costume as the marquess in Mrs Inchbald's 'The Midnight Hour' (National Gallery, London). He continued to exhibit thereafter at the academy, almost exclusively showing portraits, until 1845, missing only one or two years, with only an occasional foray into fancy or history pictures. It was upon portrait painting that his rapidly growing reputation rested and his exhibits in 1795 made a particularly strong impression, including his 'Self-Portrait' (NPG), a work which suggests the influence of Hoppner. Indeed, Hoppner expressed his admiration of Shee at this time and the likelihood of Shee's soon becoming an associate of the Royal Academy. That election took place in November 1798. In autumn 1796 Shee had moved to a large house on the south side of Golden Square at the corner of Sherard Street, and on 19 December that year he married (in Paddington church) a Roman Catholic, Mary (died 1846), eldest daughter of James Power of Youghall, co. Cork. Her ancestry, like Shee's, could be made to sound suitably grand but was similarly impoverished, and so the marriage was opposed on both sides (including, briefly, by Mrs Dillon), but was evidently happy. 
In January 1799 Shee moved again, to the house in Cavendish Square previously occupied by Romney. He initially took the nineteen-year remainder of Romney's lease, but kept the house until the end of his life. Partly because a vacancy occurred among the academicians at Barry's expulsion, Shee was swiftly elected Royal Academician in February 1800 and submitted as his diploma picture 'Belisarius' (RA). He was then commissioned to paint the duke of Clarence (afterwards William IV) for the Liverpool chamber of commerce (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), and from this date there was a marked increase in the number of his aristocratic and grander professional sitters. 
In September 1802, after the peace of Amiens, Shee, like so many artists, visited Paris to see the works of art looted by Napoleon then gathered in the Louvre. Having met the father of Prosper Merimee, he was given the opportunity of studying Napoleon close to and at length, and was impressed; the extracts of his daily journal and his letters home are of interest, not least because Shee had fluent French. In the next couple of years, however, the threat of French invasion from his admired Napoleon led Shee to the surprising attempt to raise from among the ranks of the Royal Academy a volunteer force to oppose him. There were few takers. 
It was shortly after this that Shee emerged as a poet, and 'Rhymes on Art, or, The Remonstrance of a Painter' was published to favourable notices in 1805. It ran to three editions, and influenced the founding of the British Institution in 1807. Shee was much involved in the British Institution and exhibited there for many years after 1807, showing exclusively fancy and history pictures, in contrast with the Royal Academy, where he tended to show portraits. Shee next published 'Elements of Art', a poem in six cantos (1809), which did not do so well. It includes the following in its introductory lines: '
Yet, may the Muse, tho' still her course she trace 

In technic trammels, and didactic pace, 

Collect some flow'rets as she plods along, 

Should Taste propitious smile upon the song. 

' The laboured rhetorical modesty which these lines typify soon leads the author to identify his lines as 'rough sententious rhyme', a characterization with which it is hard to disagree. Shee went on, however, to publish 'Commemoration of Reynolds, and other Poems' in 1814, followed by two novels: 'Oldcourt' (1829), in which scenes of his childhood are described, and 'Cecil Hyde' (1834); and a tragedy, 'Alasco', based on the unpromising topic of the partition of Poland. Charles Kemble put the play into rehearsal in 1823 but it was withdrawn when the licenser of plays, George Colman the younger, demanded alterations, although it was published in 1824. 
In 1805 Shee first publicly appeared in the role in which he was to be more influential than as painter, poet, novelist, or dramatist: as a tireless politician within the Royal Academy especially and in the art world at large. His first target was Joseph Farington's conduct of the hanging committee of the academy. The matter is neatly summarized by W. T. Whitley (Whitley, 1.90-91, 95-7), who also provides insight into the many dissensions within the academy during this time. Shee's long-standing friendship with Hoppner had continued until this date, and was to endure, despite their professional rivalry: Shee's pursuit of Farington was founded upon the unfair exclusion from exhibition of a picture by Hoppner on the grounds of late submission to the academy. Hoppner had clearly been too ill to submit within the deadline, but at the same time Farington's committee had allowed a late picture by Northcote, although there was no such excuse in his case. 
The long-standing result of these machinations was that Shee gained, and retained until the end of his life, the trust of his fellow academicians. Upon Lawrence's death in 1830 Shee was elected president, by eighteen votes to six for Beechey, and he was knighted in the same year. 'We expect much from Shee's self-devotion and chivalrous sense of honour', wrote Constable in a letter to a friend (Whitley, 2.185). In this curious phrase Constable seems to identify that mixture of egotism and desire 'to serve' that characterizes so many volunteer bureaucrats in British public life. It is certainly not hypocrisy; but nor is it quite selflessness. Shee was perfectly suited to running the Royal Academy. When he offered his resignation in 1845 his fellow academicians re-elected him, awarding him $300 p.a. from their funds. An annual pension in the civil list of $200 in recognition of Shee's 'merits and services' was also awarded to Lady Archer Shee, and was re-granted to their three daughters on her death on 4 May 1846. She died in Brighton, where in June 1845 Shee had effectively retired for the sake of his health, living in Pavilion Colonnade. 
After his election as president Shee defended the Royal Academy in the face of many public attacks upon it. Among them were those of Benjamin Robert Haydon, who described Shee with some exaggeration as 'the most impotent painter in the solar system' and characterized him as 'the great founder of the tip-toe school' ('Diary', ed. Pope, 2.477). These culminated in a parliamentary inquiry into the arts and principles of design, and especially into academies, by which was meant above all the Royal Academy. The evidence of Haydon and Shee, together with an extract from the select committee's report, is reprinted in Shee's 'Life' (vol. 2, pp. 413 ff.). When it became necessary for the Royal Academy to move out of Somerset House in 1837, Shee directed its removal to the National Gallery, where in 1845 he escorted the young Queen Victoria on a visit. In 1826 he had become an honorary member of the Royal Hibernian Academy, having lobbied for its charter and foundation a few years earlier. 
Shee painted a portrait of Queen Victoria in 1842 (RA) although she preferred Hayter, and it is a rather unsatisfactory picture. Shee had performed much better in his portraits 'William IV' and 'Queen Adelaide' in 1834 (both Royal Collection). These full lengths of two royal sitters show that Shee could work on a grand scale in a manner suitable for state portraiture, indeed more so than any contemporary British artist other than Lawrence. He was excellent at portraying bishops, for example, a subject which has foiled countless British painters. A fine example is one of his portraits of a friend, 'Edward Coplestone, Bishop of Llandaff' (priv. coll.), with its image of the west front of Llandaff Cathedral in the distance; Coplestone was Shee's professor of ancient literature at the Royal Academy. Shee could even do lawyers with grandeur and something approaching panache (see, for example, 'Lord Campbell'; priv. coll.). Another example of his formal portraiture is 'John B. Sawrey Morritt with the Toledo of Archmaster' (Society of Dilettanti, London). Such excellence chiefly in unsympathetic official portraiture means that it remains hard to think of Shee's professional achievement as anything other than one of passionless accomplishment. His male heads, however, are usually acutely defined, and he could sometimes strike an especially happy note. One such example is his 'Annesley Children' (exh. RA, 1793), which has rare charm, and another, from his mature years, is the outstanding 'Self-Portrait with Andrew Ellis Ellis' (ex Sothebys, London, 10 July 1991, lot 44), which may be considered his masterpiece. 
Shee died in Brighton on 19 August 1850, after a prolonged illness characterized by sudden giddiness and vomiting, often brought on by reading or writing. The offer of the Royal Academy council to organize a funeral in St Paul's Cathedral was rejected by the family in favour of a private interment in Brighton cemetery (27 August 1850), after the Roman rites had been read over his coffin and those of the Anglican church in the church near the cemetery. He was survived by three sons and three daughters. Many details of his life are recorded in a remarkably pompous biography by his middle son (Martin Archer Shee, 'The Life of Sir Martin Archer Shee', 2 vols., London, 1860). 


@@@@@


doc= 25285


Shee, Sir William (1804-1868), judge, was born in Finchley, Middlesex, on 24 June 1804, the eldest son of Joseph Shee, a merchant of Thomastown, co. Kilkenny, and Laurence Pountney Place in the City of London, and his wife, Teresa, daughter of John Darell of Scotney Castle, Kent. He was educated at a French school in Somers Town run by Abbe Carron, an associate of the religious and political writer Felicite Robert de Lamennais. In 1818 he went to St Cuthbert's College, Ushaw, near Durham, where his cousin Nicholas Wiseman (afterwards the first cardinal archbishop of the restored English Catholic hierarchy) was a student. Later he also attended lectures at the University of Edinburgh, and became a member of the discussion group known as the Speculative Society. On 31 May 1823 he became a student at Lincoln's Inn, where he studied law in the chambers of Thomas Chitty, a well-known special pleader and legal writer. He was called to the bar on 19 June 1828. 
Shee gradually built up an extensive legal practice and worked on the Maidstone sessions, becoming serjeant-at-law on 19 February 1840. He received a patent of precedence in Trinity vacation 1845, and was appointed queen's serjeant in 1857. On 26 December 1837 he married Mary (died 1861), second daughter of Sir James Gordon, bt, of Gordonstown and Letterfourie, Banffshire. They had several children, including George Darell Shee ['see below'] and Henry Gordon Shee QC, recorder of Burnley and judge of the Salford Hundred court of record. 
Shee was a moderate and consistent Liberal throughout his life. Soon after his call to the bar he spoke eloquently in favour of Catholic emancipation at a great protestant gathering which was held on Pennenden Heath, near Maidstone, on 24 November 1828. At the general election of July 1847 he stood unsuccessfully for parliament for Marylebone. In July 1852, however, he entered the House of Commons for co. Kilkenny, which he represented until parliament was dissolved in March 1857. Shee spoke for the first time on 12 November 1852, during the debate on the report on the address ('Hansard 3', 123, 1852, 139-41). In the absence of the Irish land reformer and radical politician William Sharman Crawford, Shee took charge of the 'Tenant Right Bill', which he reintroduced on 25 November 1852. On 7 December he made a long speech on Sir Joseph Napier's 'Tenants' Improvement Compensation Bill'. On the same day the 'Tenant Right Bill' was read a second time, but it was subsequently condemned by the select committee, to which it and Napier's scheme of Irish land reform had been referred. On 16 February 1854 Shee brought in a bill which, with the exception of three clauses, was the exact counterpart of Sharman Crawford's bill of the previous session, but it met with little encouragement. On 13 June 1854 he moved for leave to bring in a bill to amend the laws relating to the temporalities of the Church of Ireland, and to increase the funds for religious education and church buildings in Ireland. This motion was rejected, however, after a debate of three nights, by a majority of eighty-six votes. Convinced of the impossibility of carrying Sharman Crawford's bill through parliament, and with his blessing, on 20 February 1855 Shee brought in a 'Tenants' Improvement Compensation Bill', founded on two of Napier's bills as amended by the select committee of 1853. This bill was equally unpopular, however, and was eventually dropped. Because he was seen to have abandoned Sharman Crawford's measure, Shee lost his seat as MP for Kilkenny in the general election in April 1857, and was again defeated there at the general election in May 1859. In 1860 he refused the offer of the chief-justiceship of Madras and in September 1862 was nominated as a candidate at the by-election for Stoke-on-Trent, but received only thirty-two votes. 
Shee was an earnest and conscientious advocate, and an able, if occasionally ponderous, speaker. His breadth of legal knowledge and common-sense approach won the approval of his fellow lawyers and he acted as counsel in many famous trials of the day, such as the 'Roupell case'. He conducted the defence of William Palmer (1824-1856) and was criticized for saying in his speech that he believed Palmer to be innocent. 
On 19 December 1863 Shee was appointed by Lord Westbury a justice of the court of queen's bench in the place of Sir William Wightman, and on 10 June 1864 he was knighted ('London Gazette', 22 Dec 1863, 6645; 'London Gazette', 14 June 1864, 3072). He was the first Roman Catholic to be promoted to the English bench since the revolution of 1688. 
Shee edited several editions of Lord Tenterden's 'Treatise of the Law Relative to Merchant Ships and Seamen' and Samuel Marshall's 'Treatise on the Law of Insurance'. He also wrote 'Reflections on the Trial of the Prince de Polignac' (1836), 'The Act for the more effectual Application of Charitable Donations and Bequests in Ireland (7 & 8 Vict. c. xcvii.' (1845), and a number of other works, including pamphlets on church appropriations and endowments (1849), 'The Irish church: being a digest of the returns of the prelates, dignitaries, and beneficed clergy' (1852; 2nd edn, 1863 or 1864), a work on the 'Merchant Shipping Acts' of 1854, and 'Papers and letters on subjects of literary, historical, and political interest, and speeches at public meetings, in parliament, and at the bar', (vol. 1, 1862, privately printed) and 'Papers, letters, and speeches in the House of Commons on the Irish land question with a summary of its parliamentary history from the general election of 1852 to the close of the session of 1863' (1863). The last was, in effect, the second volume of Shee's 'Papers and letters', but though 'vol ii' appears on the original cloth cover, it is absent from the title-page. 
After sitting on the bench for little more than four years, Shee died from an attack of apoplexy on 19 February 1868 at his residence, 5 Sussex Place, Hyde Park Gardens, London. His wife predeceased him on 11 October 1861, aged forty-five. 
Their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 25286


Sheehan, John (1809-1882), journalist, was the son of Thomas Sheehan, a grazier, and Alicia Dunn of Celbridge, co. Kildare. He was educated at Clongowes Wood College, where he was taught by Francis Sylvester Mahony, better known as Father Prout. In October 1829 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, but he did not graduate. In 1830 he joined the Comet Club, a literary society with members including Samuel Lover, Joseph Stirling Coyne, Robert Knox, subsequently editor of the 'Morning Post', and Maurice O'Connell, son of Daniel O'Connell. At first its members prepared and issued pamphlets attacking the tithe system; the first, 'The Parson's Horn Book', which appeared in two parts with etchings by Lover, met with extraordinary success. According to Sheehan it had a greater circulation and caused more sensation than any book issued in Ireland since the days of Swift. The club then issued 'The Comet', a satirical weekly paper which attacked the Church of Ireland, the first number appearing on 1 May 1831. Sheehan was appointed sub-editor. In a few weeks it had reached a circulation of many thousand copies, and until it ceased at the end of 1833 exercised considerable influence. In the autumn of 1833 the government ordered the arrest of the editor, Thomas Browne, and Sheehan for libel. They were defended by Daniel O'Connell and Robert Holmes, but were each sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment and ordered to pay a fine of $100. The fine was, however, remitted, and the term of imprisonment was only partly served. 
Sheehan, on his release, studied for the Irish bar, to which he was called in 1835. He shortly afterwards came to London, where he became a journalist, and in 1836 he was in Paris and Madrid as representative of 'The Constitutional' newspaper. He next became parliamentary reporter of the 'Morning Herald', and contributed poems and sketches to 'Bentley's Miscellany' and other magazines. In March 1839 he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, but he did not graduate. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1841 and called to the English bar in 1846. He had been admitted to the King's Inns in 1843, but seems never to have practised. In 1852 he was proprietor and editor of 'The Independent', published in London and Cambridge. As a young man in Paris in the 1830s Thackeray knew Sheehan well, and he is believed to be the original of Captain Shandon in 'Pendennis'. 
Shortly after 1868 Sheehan married the widow of Colonel Shubrick, a wealthy Anglo-Indian officer, and spent some years in travelling about the continent. He eventually retired to the Charterhouse, where he died on 29 May 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 25287


Sheehy, Nicholas (1728/9-1766), Roman Catholic priest, was born near Fethard, co. Tipperary, Ireland. Little is known about his parents except that his mother's maiden name was Power. He was educated in Louvain, Belgium, and ordained in Rome in 1752, and upon his return to Ireland he became curate of Newcastle, co. Tipperary, and later parish priest of a group of parishes centring on Clogheen, co. Tipperary. Clogheen became the centre of serious agrarian disturbances, led by the Whiteboys, in the early 1760s. Their chief grievances were the enclosure of commons and the high rent for potato ground, both of which resulted in the displacement of settlements. As the latter were the source of income for Catholic priests such as Sheehy, they were now left with little or nothing. These circumstances may have predisposed Sheehy to concur with Whiteboy aims. He encouraged resistance to the collection of 5's'. for every marriage celebrated in the area around Ballyporeen, co. Tipperary, a novel claim advanced by a tithe farmer in 1762. He opposed the collection of church rates and tithes in the Newcastle area. R. R. Madden suggested that Sheehy collected money for the defence of those of his parishioners accused of Whiteboy crimes, and thus their acquittal was attributed to him. His apparent encouragement of this agitation was to mark him out as an enemy of the government and protestant gentry. 
The 1760s saw the coincidence in time and place of a unique set of circumstances which caused protestants in the region to feel insecure in the face of, as they perceived it, a new assertiveness on the part of Catholics. Sheehy was seen by the county gentry as a ringleader in raising a rebellion to undo the land settlement, reverse the penal laws, and unite with the French. Multiple expressions of Catholic assertiveness, compounded by their inability to obtain convictions for Whiteboy offences, broke the nerve of the local gentry and unleashed a sectarian campaign, one victim of which was Sheehy. 
Sheehy was presented by the grand jury at the summer assizes of 1762 for being an unregistered priest. This invoked a statute which had fallen into disuse, but nothing apparently came of the charge. In May 1763 he was indicted for forcing people not to inform against the Whiteboys, but the charge appears to have been dropped. Indictments for high treason, rebellion, and assault followed in 1764, but no convictions ensued. Frustrated at this, the local gentry influenced the government to issue a proclamation in February 1765 offering $300 for Sheehy's capture. Shortly after he surrendered voluntarily, and the government conceded to his wish to stand trial in Dublin rather than in Tipperary, where justice was likely to be more partial. Although he was bailed in June 1765 to the amount of $4000, it took eleven months before he stood trial in February 1766, largely because of questionable delays in assembling the prosecution case. At his trial he was acquitted as the prosecution witnesses proved unreliable, an outcome not entirely unforeseen by his prosecutors, who now brought forward a murder charge for which Sheehy was to be tried in Tipperary rather than Dublin, a concession which reneged on the original government assurance. The charge related to the disappearance in late 1764 of John Bridge, a key informant against Sheehy. The defence case rested on the unreliability of the prosecution witnesses, on an alibi for Sheehy's location on the night of the supposed murder, and on the lack of evidence that the victim had actually been murdered, since the body was never located and, in fact, Bridge was later rumoured to have gone to Newfoundland. None the less, on 12 March 1766 Sheehy was convicted and sentenced to death by hanging, which followed in Clonmel on 15 March. Prior to his execution, Sheehy, in a letter to Major Joseph Sirr, suggested that the real murderers of Bridge had been revealed to him in the confessional but, by virtue of his clerical office, he could not use this information in his own defence. He was buried in Shanrahan graveyard. 
Most believed the murder charge to be spurious. Popular reaction among Catholics was exemplified in the stoning to death of Sheehy's executioner in 1770. Protestants outside the region did not view the charges as credible. Such were the proceedings against Sheehy regarded that the term 'Sheehy's jury' became a derogatory one applied to any jury which acted in an arbitrary fashion. Of the members of the grand jury that condemned Sheehy, the majority reportedly came to sad and sudden ends, which has been interpreted as divine retribution for their action. Within a short time Sheehy was accorded the status of martyr, and there were regular and well-attended pilgrimages to his grave. He became the subject of a number of poems and laments. Sheehy's memory was perpetuated in the context of the land war of the 1880s when he was cited as an exemplar of priestly leadership and collective action. The centenary celebrations of the 1798 rebellion in 1898 saw the erection of a memorial tablet on his grave site. 
Sheehy's execution was one of the most significant events in eighteenth-century Ireland. It exemplified intense sectarian animosities and it cast the government, the local gentry, and the Catholic hierarchy in an unfavourable light. 


@@@@@


doc= 25288


Anne Sheepshanks (1789-1876), patron of science, Richard Sheepshanks's elder sister, was born in Leeds, Yorkshire. She lived with him from the time he left college and was his sole heir. In 1858 she presented $10,000 to the University of Cambridge for the promotion of research in astronomy, terrestrial magnetism, and meteorology at the observatory, as well as for the foundation of an exhibition in astronomy bearing her brother's name. To this she added in 1860 $2000 for the purchase of a transit circle. To the Royal Astronomical Society she made, in 1857, a donation of Sheepshanks's extensive and valuable collection of instruments, and was elected in return to honorary membership on 14 February 1862. She died at London Road, Reading, on 8 February 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 25289


Sheepshanks, John (1787-1863), art collector and patron, was born in Leeds, where his father, Joseph Sheepshanks, was a wealthy cloth manufacturer. His mother was Anne Wilson of a Westmorland family; Richard Sheepshanks (1794-1855), the well-known astronomer, was his younger brother. John Sheepshanks retired before the age of forty, until which time he was a partner in his father's firm of York and Sheepshanks. 
While still in business, Sheepshanks had developed a taste for collecting. He started by acquiring books and Flemish and Dutch prints, and proceeded to collecting copies of Italian old masters. Moving to London on his retirement, he turned his attention to promoting and encouraging contemporary British artists. Generally commissioning directly from artists, he built up a collection, largely of genre paintings: among the artists represented were Turner, Constable, Edwin Landseer, John Linnell, William Mulready, C. R. Leslie, David Roberts, Clarkson Stanfield, David Wilkie, Thomas Creswick, R. P. Bonington, John Crome, and Alexander Nasmyth. Sheepshanks's collection was unique at the time, the only other large-scale collection of contemporary British art being that of Robert Vernon (who, however, also bought British old masters such as Reynolds and Gainsborough). 
Vernon's collection had been given to the nation in 1847, and in 1857 Sheepshanks followed suit, offering his 233 paintings in oil and 289 drawings and sketches as a gift to form the nucleus of a national gallery of British art. The deed of gift was framed with a view to rendering the pictures a source of education to the rising generation of artists, and with this intention they were placed with the South Kensington Museum. The galleries built to house them -- which opened on 20 June 1857 -- were the first permanent buildings on this site. In a truly altruistic spirit, Sheepshanks stated that it was not his desire that his collection 'be kept apart or bear his name as such'; however, the paintings have generally remained together and the collection has always been distinguished by the name of the donor. Sheepshanks added a notable proviso to his deed of gift, calling for Sunday afternoon openings as soon as possible. This provision was first carried out in 1896. 
Sheepshanks moved to Hastings about 1833, and then to Blackheath, where he devoted himself to horticulture, becoming a fellow of the Royal Horticultural Society. He was of a retiring and unostentatious disposition, but his house was the resort of artists and literary figures. He died, unmarried, on 5 October 1863, at 24 Rutland Gate, London, where he had lived since 1842. 


