@@@@@


doc= 25290


Sheepshanks, Richard (1794-1855), astronomer, was born at Leeds on 30 July 1794, the fourth son and sixth child of Joseph Sheepshanks, a cloth manufacturer, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Richard Wilson of Kendal. John Sheepshanks was his brother. Educated at Richmond School, Yorkshire, Sheepshanks entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1812, graduated in mathematics as tenth wrangler in 1816, and took his MA in 1819. At Cambridge he formed, with William Whewell, Adam Sedgwick, Connop Thirlwall, and others, the brilliant group later known as the 'Northern Lights'. 
Sheepshanks was elected fellow of Trinity in 1817, and, as he never married, he retained the fellowship for life. He was called to the bar in 1825, and took orders in the church of England on 18 June 1826, but the comparative affluence in which his father's death left him permitted him to follow instead his scientific vocation. He joined the Astronomical Society on 14 January 1825 and, as its secretary from 1829 onwards, edited for many years and greatly improved its 'Monthly Notices'. In 1830 the Royal Society elected him a fellow, and two years later he became a member of its council. He took part in 1828 in George Airy's pendulum operations in Dolcoath mine, Cornwall, though these were abandoned following subterranean flooding, and about the same time he actively promoted the establishment of the Cambridge observatory. Appointed in 1831 a commissioner for revising borough boundaries under the 'Reform Act', he visited and determined most of those between the Thames and Humber. He also occasionally acted as an adviser to the government on routine astronomical matters. 
When he became secretary of the Astronomical Society, Sheepshanks quickly came into conflict with its president, James South. Late in 1829 South purchased a French telescopic object-glass of exceptional size and quality, and he commissioned the venerable instrument maker Edward Troughton to mount it. South, however, was dissatisfied with the result and refused to pay Troughton, whereupon Troughton, with the strong encouragement of Sheepshanks, took South to court. The case lasted from 1834 to 1838, with Sheepshanks taking a prominent role, and eventually South was forced to pay. The dispute had something of class character to it, with South, who was knighted in 1830, and was a wealthy scientific amateur, seeking to pit his expertise against the expert tradesman Troughton and the paid astronomer Airy. South and his ally, Charles Babbage, were able to take their revenge in 1852, most notably through a letter from South published in the 'Mechanics' Magazine' for 24 January publicizing an incident in 1823 when Sheepshanks, to avoid paying duty on the importation of a French instrument, had had the instrument engraved with Troughton's name to make it appear of British manufacture. Babbage sent copies to the Royal Society and the Royal Astronomical Society, 'as a sort of impeachment', and even brought the matter before the board of visitors of the Royal Observatory, to which Sheepshanks belonged. Sheepshanks defended himself, admitting and regretting the deception, but denying the alleged aggravating circumstances, in a lengthy and abusive 'Letter in Reply to the Calumnies of Mr. Babbage' (1854). This was one of several 'piquant pamphlets' (De Morgan, 562-3) with which he enlivened the scientific scene around the mid-century. Another dealt with the award of the Neptune medal, and a third, in 1845, with the affairs of the Liverpool observatory. Sheepshanks, as a gentleman of leisure himself, appears to have regarded it as his duty to attack what he saw as injustices committed by others of his standing. 
Sheepshanks was a member of the royal commissions on weights and measures in 1838 and 1843, and was entrusted in 1844, after the death of Francis Baily, with the reconstruction of the standard of length. The work, for which he accepted no payment, occupied eleven laborious years. It was carried on in a cellar beneath the Royal Astronomical Society's rooms in Somerset House, and involved the registration of nearly 90,000 micrometrical readings. In order to ensure their accuracy he constructed his own standard thermometers by a process he communicated to the society in June 1851. His succinct account of the whole series of operations was embodied in the report of the commissioners presented to parliament in 1854. Their result was of first-class excellence, and the new standard, with certain authorized copies, was legalized by a bill that received the royal assent on 30 July 1855. 
Sheepshanks presented in 1838 to the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, an 8 foot equatorial telescope, with an object-glass, by Cauchoix, of nearly 7 inches aperture. In the same year he determined the longitudes of Antwerp and Brussels, and in 1844 those of Valentia, Kingstown, and Liverpool. He lavished time and money on astronomical instruments, though he was often more concerned with the instruments for their own sake than for what he might achieve with them. In particular, he originated an effective and easy method of driving an equatorial by clockwork. He lived at Woburn Place, London, from 1824 to 1841 and at Reading from 1841 until his death. A small observatory was attached to each house. 
On 29 July 1855 Sheepshanks was struck with paralysis, and died on 4 August 1855 at Reading. Sometimes described as the 'radical parson', Sheepshanks inspired both irritation and affection in his scientific circles. His biting satirical language and fighting spirit were hallowed by an earnest commitment to justice and a sociable nature. 




@@@@@


doc= 25291


Sheres, Sir Henry (bap. 1641, d. 1710), military engineer and author, was baptized on 17 June 1641 at St Nicholas's, Deptford Green, a son of Henry Sheres (died in or after 1675) of Deptford, a captain in the interregnum navy, and his wife, Susan Pelly ('b'. 1613). His early years are unknown but in 1666 he went to Spain in the service of the ambassador-extraordinary Edward Montagu, earl of Sandwich, and was the 'trusty and ingenious' messenger employed in September 1667 to carry back to England Sandwich's treaty with the Spanish. On his return to England he became acquainted with Pepys, who found him 'a good engenious man, but doth talk a little too much of his travels' (Pepys, 'Diary', 8.444). In the following spring Pepys became jealous of Sheres's attentions to his wife, Elizabeth, despite his realization that his fears were groundless and that Sheres was 'a very civil and worthy man' (ibid., 9.533). Any potential conflict was averted when Sheres left for Tangier in May 1669. He had been employed in the previous autumn on surveying the fortifications and harbour there, and now became partly responsible for building the great breakwater or 'mole' that was intended to turn the English colony into a great entrepot for Mediterranean trade. Sheres initially held the position of 'clerk examiner' under the chief engineer, Sir Hugh Cholmley, and in 1669 travelled to Genoa to view the mole there, which he favoured as a model for that at Tangier. 
Sheres returned briefly to England in 1675, where he became a fellow of the Royal Society. John Evelyn encountered him at a Royal Society dinner on 4 March; Sheres was evidently still fond of regaling others with tales of his travels, on this occasion holding forth on the subjects of scorpions, locusts, elephants, and chameleons. Damage to the mole over the winter of 1674-5 discredited Cholmley, and Sheres's proposal for completing it by a different (and significantly cheaper) method, which relied on sinking large stone-filled chests, won official approval. Consequently he succeeded Cholmley as surveyor-general, and began work in July 1676. Despite shortages of money and incessant difficulties with the weather, the Moors, the technology, and his enemies in England and Tangier -- especially the disgruntled Cholmley and the local naval commander, Arthur Herbert -- Sheres gradually extended the mole to its final length of 479 yards. He played a key role during the siege of Tangier in 1680, organizing the artillery defences and subsequently rebuilding the fortifications. 
Sheres also played a significant part in the counter-attack from Pole Fort on 27 October, 'a very hott and bloody piece of service' in which Sheres was 'a principal instrument both by his valour and advice of the victory we obtained' (Routh, 194, 197). When the colony was evacuated in 1683 he wrote the report that condemned his own handiwork, the mole, and oversaw its demolition. Sheres was well aware of the charge of hypocrisy that might be levelled at him: when he showed Pepys his report, the latter commented that 'he did show me his foul draft of the ordinary objections made against the Mole improved the most he could to justify the King's destroying of it, though he did tell me privately that he is able to answer them all' (Chappell, 36-7). By this time Sheres had established or restored a close friendship with Pepys, and had also gained the confidence of the navy's commander, Lord Dartmouth. Indeed in 1682 Pepys had recommended Sheres to Dartmouth in the most fulsome terms as a man possessing 'uprightness of mind, universality of knowledge in all useful learning, particularly mathematics, and of them those parts especially which relate to gunnery and fortifications' ('Letters and the Second Diary', 144-5). 
In 1685 Sheres served with the artillery in the Sedgemoor campaign, but disliked the experience: he argued with other officers over the status and deployment of the artillery, and told Dartmouth that 'in plain English I have seen too much violence and wickedness practised to be fond of this trade... for what we every day practise among this poor people cannot be supported by any man of the least morality' ('Dartmouth MSS', 3.126). Nevertheless he was rewarded in July with a knighthood and the position of surveyor of the ordnance. During the revolution of 1688 he was recovering from a serious illness, but on 1 November he assured James II that he was well enough to campaign and belatedly set off with an artillery train of 250 carriages, reaching Basingstoke by 14 November. He was regarded afterwards as a potential Jacobite, and was arrested twice, in June 1690 and February 1696. He was in Ireland in 1700; on 30 March he was appointed a trustee to regulate the king's Irish grants, and in March 1701 he was summoned to the House of Lords to explain the proceedings of the trustees. He received a ring at Pepys's funeral in 1703. 
Sheres wrote extensively. He composed poetry (one of the attributes that had attracted Elizabeth Pepys to him) and translated some of the classics, especially Polybius and Lucian. He also published 'A Discourse on the Mediterranean Sea' in 1703, in which he still bemoaned the loss of Tangier, 'a jewel fit only to adorn the crown that wears it, whose value I can better conceive than write' (Sheres, 20). Sheres edited for publication two works by Sir Walter Ralegh: 'A Discourse on Seaports' (1700) and 'An Essay on Ways and Means to Maintain the Honour of England' (1701). Several other discourses circulated only in manuscript: these included 'A discourse touching the decay of our naval discipline' (1694), a damning indictment of faction-fighting, and 'Some directions for my Lord Nottingham's building', which included his thoughts on architecture. 
By 1706-7 Sheres was increasingly troubled by illness, particularly gout, and he died on 21 April 1710. He seems never to have married, but Pepys recorded that he had kept a mistress in Tangier. By his will, made in September 1709, he left $1000 to his servant Martha Scarlett, and his library to Henry Overton of Trinity College, Oxford, the son of another former servant. His estate might have been greater if his own claims relating to the mole had been satisfied: in 1700 he calculated that he was still owed $14,000 in arrears of salary and disbursements on stores from his time as surveyor-general. Pepys consulted him on many matters, from gunnery to Noah's Ark, and thought that in comparison with all the other engineers and gunners in England, 'Mr Sheres by his experience exceeds them all' (Chappell, 150). 


@@@@@


doc= 25292


Sheffield, Edmund, first Baron Sheffield (1521-1549), nobleman, was born on 21 November 1521, the elder son of Sir Robert Sheffield (died 1531), of West Butterwick, Lincolnshire, and his first wife, Jane Stanley, a second cousin of Henry VIII. His family had prospered in recent generations, mainly through legal practice, and Edmund, who had a younger brother, David, and a sister, Eleanor, was heir to a substantial estate in the north midlands and Lincolnshire. Following his father's death on 15 November 1531, on 28 April 1533 Edmund's wardship was granted to George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford. Rochford was executed on 17 May 1536, and on 2 January 1538 the wardship and marriage were granted to John de Vere, fifteenth earl of Oxford; the grant probably confirmed an existing situation, for by the end of that month Sheffield was married to Oxford's daughter Anne, and the earl was asking Thomas Cromwell to be good lord to his son-in-law. About this time Sheffield was duly numbered among the 'Gentlemen of my lord Privy Seal's mete to be preferred unto the King's Majesty's service' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/2, no. 1184). 
Cromwell's services to his young protege were not confined to such presumed patronage. Predeceased by his first wife, Sir Robert Sheffield had later married Margaret Zouche. Following Sir Robert's death his widow herself remarried, her second husband being John Cavendish. About 1538 Edmund Sheffield quarrelled with Cavendish and sent him rude letters which came into Cromwell's hands. Sheffield now wrote to the secretary in Latin, addressing him as a fellow evangelical -- 'most vigilant patron ['Maecenas'] of holy scripture' -- and begging for his intercession. This lengthy epistle, which apologizes for literary incompetence while exuding all the self-confidence of a clever young man, may well have amused Cromwell, who had it endorsed 'Edmund Sheffelde Scolasticall Letter' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/134 fol. 202'r'- 'v'). Another quarrel about this time put Sheffield in prison, whence he sent Cavendish (now apparently on good terms with him) a letter in English, full of scriptural references and asking for a visit and also for an appeal to Cromwell on his behalf. Neither episode did Sheffield any harm. Having attained his majority at the end of 1542, he had livery of his lands on 7 February 1543. In 1544 he went with the army to France. Before he left, on 20 May, he made his will, which reveals that by this time he had a son, John, and two daughters, Frances and Eleanor. On the same day he conveyed his estates in Nottinghamshire, Staffordshire, and Derbyshire to trustees headed by Henry Howard, earl of Surrey. Two years later he accompanied Viscount Lisle's embassy to France. 
At the end of 1546 Sheffield was one of ten men considered by Henry VIII for promotion to the baronage, and one of only four to be eventually ennobled: his charter of creation was given on 16 February 1547. His qualifications in terms of past services are hardly conspicuous. He was a wealthy man, however, able in his will to order the payment of debts and bequests totalling some $3000, and with lands assessed at $400 per annum in 1547, and it may have been hoped that he and Sir William Willoughby of Parham, likewise made a baron, would fill a gap left in the structure of authority in Lincolnshire in 1545 by the death of the county's greatest lord, Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, leaving a nine-year-old heir. He may also have owed his ennoblement to his personal qualities: loyal, brave, cultivated -- Thomas Fuller later wrote of him, 'Great his skill in music, who wrote a book of sonnets after the Italian fashion' (Fuller, 2.291) -- and with reformist leanings in religion, perhaps he was simply the sort of promising young man the old king liked and wished to advance. 
Later in 1547 Sheffield was appointed to the Lincolnshire peace commission (though not to the quorum), but was arguably still too young for a role in government. He never had the chance to take such a part. In 1549 he joined the royal army confronting Kett's rising in Norfolk, and was a member of the force with which the marquess of Northampton tried to occupy Norwich on 31 July. The incursion came to grief in the city streets, and Sheffield fell into a ditch while wheeling his horse and was killed by the rebels, pleading in vain for his life -- a butcher named Fulke is said to have struck the fatal blow. He was buried next day in St Martin's at the Palace, Norwich. Sheffield's death prompted grief at the loss of a gifted young man, and also outrage at the killing of a nobleman by his social inferiors. Barnabe Googe, only nine at the time but a native of Lincolnshire, later addressed an epitaph to Sheffield as 'good Lord whom deare I loved', and denounced the 'crabbed Clowns' and 'Dunghyll Dogs' who slew him (Googe, 69-70), while Sir John Cheke paid warm tribute to his virtues, describing him as 'both fit for counsell in peace, and for conduct in war... being loved of everie man, and hated of no man...' (Holinshed, 3.1046). In 1551 his son John, in compensation for his father's expenses two years earlier, was granted from his inheritance an annuity first of $20 and then of nearly $50, and also his own marriage. His widow, who later married John Brock of Colchester, died early in 1572. 


@@@@@


doc= 25293


Sheffield, Edmund, first earl of Mulgrave (1565-1646), politician, was born on 7 December 1565, the only son of John, second Baron Sheffield ('c'.1538-1568), of Butterwick, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Douglas Sheffield, Lady Sheffield (1542/3-1608), daughter of William Howard, first Lord Howard of Effingham. He inherited his father's title on 10 December 1568. Shortly after his father's death, his mother embarked upon a liaison with the earl of Leicester. She later claimed that a secret marriage occurred about 1571 and, although the evidence for this union is inconclusive, she did bear Leicester a son. In any event Leicester denied the existence of the bond when he married Lettice, countess of Essex, in 1578. Sheffield was educated at Christ Church, Oxford (1574-9), and in 1582 Queen Elizabeth commanded him to accompany the duke of Anjou on his return voyage to the continent. In 1585 he served as a volunteer in the Netherlands. The approach of the Spanish Armada offered him further opportunities and he served as captain of three ships in the campaign: the 'Victory', 'Dreadnaught', and 'White Bear'. His uncle Lord Admiral Howard knighted him for his service on 26 July 1588, and praised him in reports to the council. 
Despite his heroics at sea and in the Netherlands, however, Sheffield's standing with the queen was threatened by suspicions about his religion. His wife, Ursula Tyrwhitt, of Kettleby, Lincolnshire, was a devout Catholic, and the two were married according to the Catholic rite some time before 13 November 1581. Success at court came only slowly. In 1591 the crown granted him the manor of Mulgrave in Yorkshire, and thereafter Sheffield gradually transferred his interests northward from Lincolnshire. In 1594 Sir Robert Carey reported that the queen refused to grant him the presidency of the Welsh marches because of his wife's religion. He demonstrated his allegiance by strenuously persecuting Catholics in his neighbourhood, winning praise from local authorities: 'My lord took great pains to give such testimony of his affection to religion as none of his coat have done' ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 232). Catholics denounced him for his harshness and claimed that the untimely deaths of all six of his sons with Ursula was a divine judgment. Elizabeth honoured him with the Garter in April 1593, and in January 1599, after vigorous lobbying on his part, she appointed him governor of Brill in the Netherlands, a post he apparently never took up. 
It was not until the accession of James I that Sheffield received the post he coveted most, the presidency of the council of the north; he had asked for the job as early as 1595 but Elizabeth had denied him. As a prelude James named him lord lieutenant of Yorkshire on 1 August 1603, and added the presidency on 19 September. Sheffield's good fortune did not satisfy him, however. The expenses of his office were high, and he had nine daughters to provide for. In 1604 he complained bitterly of his plight. In an audience with the king he lamented that James had 'repaired the ruins of every nobleman's estate in England except his'. The king, irritated by Sheffield's petulance, offered him an annual pension of $1000 which Sheffield said 'would do him no good', but James held firm, telling his suitor that 'my liberality ought not to be measured by his want, for I was bound to be no man's banker' (Akrigg, 242-5). Eventually James relented and, before 1609, Sheffield received an interest in the Yorkshire alum mines, from which over the years he drew a substantial -- though always insufficient -- amount of money. 
As lord president and, from 1616, vice-admiral of Yorkshire, Sheffield actively enforced the laws against recusants. In 1604 he presided over the indictment of 900 recusants at York assizes, and in later years was vigilant against what he perceived as the Catholic threat in the north. He did not always get along with his colleagues on the council; in 1609 charges were laid against him for 'arbitrary conduct and not consulting the other commissioners', though these seem to have come to nothing ('CSP dom.', '1603-10', 577). In any event, the heavy expenses of his office and his weak estate encouraged him to seek a buyer for the office by 1614. His tottering fortune was briefly shored up by the king's favour in 1615 when he collected the $10,000 Sir Robert Dormer paid for his barony. He finally sold the lord presidency of the north to Lord Scrope in 1619, although he retained his vice-admiralty. He left office under a cloud, for the Spanish ambassador had complained about Sheffield's execution of a Catholic priest, though it seems likely that his money problems were a more important factor. 
Sheffield's financial troubles were exacerbated by his colonial speculations; he was an early member of the Virginia Company and in succeeding years worked diligently to advance its fortunes, though with little success. He also invested in the New England Company, with similar results. Ursula had died some time before 4 August 1618 and after a fruitless search for a rich wife, in 1619, when he was sixty-four, Sheffield settled on Mariana ('c'.1603- 'c'.1676), the sixteen-year-old daughter of Sir William Irwin, a Scot maliciously (and inaccurately) described by John Chamberlain as 'a kind of dancing tutor to Prince Henry' ('CSP dom.', '1619-23', 21). They were married on 4 March 1619. Although Irwin was a gentleman of Prince Henry's privy chamber, Anne Clifford described the match as 'very mean and... indiscreet' ('Diary', 102). Indiscreet or not, the couple had five children, further adding to Sheffield's financial woes. The alum monopoly which provided a large portion of his income was an unreliable source, and after 1620 he received little of the profits of office. He was estranged from the duke of Buckingham in the 1620s, but after his accession Charles I, on 5 February 1626, promoted him to earl of Mulgrave, possibly as a reward for his staunch support of the war against Spain. 
Mulgrave grew increasingly alienated from the king, despite his new rank. In 1640 he refused to contribute an assessment of $1 to the war effort against the Scots, alleging poverty. His financial situation was certainly grim, but his call for a parliament in August 1640 suggests that his resistance was founded on other grounds. When the civil war came he and his family sided with parliament; two of his sons served in parliament's army, and two daughters married into the family of the parliamentarian general Lord Fairfax. Because most of his property in the north remained in royalist hands throughout the war, from March 1645 parliament paid Mulgrave a weekly pension of $50. His advanced age kept him from constant attendance in the House of Lords, but his proxy was a valuable commodity in the thinly attended chamber. Although at first in the hands of Lord Saye and Sele, in May 1646 he switched his allegiance to the presbyterian Essex, who held the earl's proxy thereafter. This was Mulgrave's final significant political act; he died at his home in Hammersmith, Middlesex, in October 1646, aged eighty-one, and was buried in the church he had founded there. He was succeeded by his grandson, Edmund Sheffield, second earl of Mulgrave. 


@@@@@


doc= 25294


Sheffield, Edmund, second earl of Mulgrave (1611-1658), parliamentarian nobleman, was born about December 1611, the grandson of Edmund Sheffield, first earl of Mulgrave (1565-1646). His father, Sir John Sheffield, who drowned in the Humber in 1614, had married Grizel, daughter of Sir Edmund Anderson, chief justice of the common pleas. In May 1617 Edmund was not expected to survive head injuries received after falling downstairs. He married Elizabeth Cranfield (1607/8-1672), daughter of the financier Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex, by licence dated April 1631, with a dowry of $2000. Difficulties over money long soured his relationship with his father-in-law. His unorthodox religious beliefs are indicated by the fact that at some date in the 1630s the dean of the arches, Dr John Lambe, cited him for commissioning a translation of 'that cursed book', the medieval spiritual work 'Theologia Germanica'. The effort and risk involved implies intense interest in or sympathy with its mysticism. Lord Sheffield since his grandfather assumed the earldom in 1626, he succeeded as second earl of Mulgrave on 6 October 1646 and took his seat in the House of Lords on 20 October. 
Acquiring a London residence, the sequestrated Kirke House in Spring Gardens, for $50 rent in October 1645, Mulgrave was appointed vice-admiral of Yorkshire in succession to his grandfather (13 November 1646) by the Long Parliament. In August 1647 he signed the engagement to stand by Fairfax and the army for the restoration of the freedom of parliament. He was named as one of the commissioners for compounding on 8 February 1647 and for the navy and customs on 17 December 1647, and on 1 June 1648 he was added to the parliamentarian executive Derby House committee. He also appealed successfully to the Lords to cancel the monopoly on the manufacture and sale of alum granted to Sir John Gibson, in order to utilize the alum works he owned in Yorkshire. On 14 February 1649 he was appointed a member of the council of state of the Commonwealth, but declined to accept the post from dissatisfaction at the execution of the king and the abolition of the House of Lords. In August 1649 he accepted John Lisle's invitation to lodge with him and Bulstrode Whitelocke at Sion House, Middlesex, unaware that Whitelocke had invited Lisle alone. In February 1653 Mulgrave petitioned the council of state for compensation for parliament's partial demolition of Mulgrave Castle in 1647. The recommendation of the Irish and Scots affairs committee for the payment of $1200 was not implemented due to the dissolution of the Rump Parliament, but on 3 February 1654 Cromwell agreed to take the matter on. His council voted $1000 to Mulgrave though the order for payment by the exchequer had to be transferred to the treasury commissioners in March 1655. 
Mulgrave had been considered reliable enough to be recommended to Cromwell as an additional councillor on 19 June 1654. He took his place on the protectorate council on 30 June and was in regular attendance for some years. He took particular responsibility for the preservation of game in the former royal forests in Lincolnshire, but his attendance at the council declined, possibly owing to poor health; in 1656 he was absent from 22 May until 16 September and only then returned on orders. In December 1657 the protector summoned him to his new House of Lords, but Mulgrave never took his seat; disapproval is less likely than illness. He died 'by the way' on 24 August 1658 'en route' for London in response to a summons to attend the upper house, and was buried at Normanby church, Yorkshire. One of the few peers to have adhered to Cromwell, he was succeeded by his son John Sheffield, afterwards first duke of Buckingham and Normanby. 


@@@@@


doc= 25295


Sheffield, George (1838-1892), marine and landscape painter, was born on 1 January 1838 at High Street, Wigton, Cumberland, the son of Thomas Sheffield, a draper, and his wife, Jane Johnston. His uncle, George Sheffield (1800-1852), had been a student at the Royal Academy, and had a considerable local reputation as a portrait painter. From him and from Henry Hoodless, also a Wigton resident, Sheffield obtained help in his youthful studies. While still very young he moved with his father to Warrington, where he received his first art teaching from the portrait and genre painter Samuel Luke Fildes RA in the art school of that town. At first Sheffield adopted the sea as a profession, sailing across the Atlantic and to Holland, but after a few years' experience of this life he settled at Manchester, studying in the school of art and becoming a pattern designer with a firm of calico printers. He soon turned his attention to landscape painting, producing with great facility, truth, and beauty, seascapes, coast scenes, and landscapes. Like other Manchester-based artists he spent time painting around Conwy Falls in north Wales. 
Sheffield worked in oil and watercolour, and produced some fine works in both mediums, but undoubtedly his forte was the use of monochrome. His drawings in sepia and black and white are remarkable for their variety and delicate beauty of atmospheric effect. He worked with great speed, and produced a vast number of drawings. In 1869 he was elected an associate of the Manchester Academy and a full member in 1871. From 1868 he was a regular exhibitor at all the Manchester and other local exhibitions, and between 1872 and 1890 he showed six pictures at the Royal Academy, including 'Lindon Common' and 'View in the Island of Sark', and eleven at other London exhibitions. Nearly all his best pictures were acquired by Lancashire collectors, including Robert H. Edmondson. There are in Manchester City Galleries two works by Sheffield -- an oil painting, 'A Hundred Years Ago', and a number of watercolours, including 'The Trough of the Sea'. Sheffield died in Ancoats Hospital, Mill Street, Manchester, on 2 October 1892. His wife predeceased him; eight children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25296


Sheffield, John (d. 1680), clergyman and ejected minister, came from Northamptonshire. His parents' names are not known, though Sheffield (or Sheffeild, the spelling under which his books were published) seems to have come from a junior branch of the family of the Sheffields, earls of Mulgrave and lords Sheffield of Butterwick. In the dedication to a book he published in 1650 he saluted Edmund, the second earl, as 'head of a great family, and the highest branch of a numerous name, all whose sheaves do willingly bow to your Lordship's sheaf as gladly and wilingly as Joseph's brethren did to him' (Sheffeild, 'A Good Conscience the Strongest Hold', sig. A4). 
Sheffield matriculated from Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1618, where he was listed as a poor scholar on 5 December of that year. He graduated BA in 1622 and proceeded MA in 1625. Ordained a deacon in the diocese of Peterborough on 22 December 1622 he became curate of Felmersham, Bedfordshire, in the following year while still at Cambridge, but his ordination as a priest (also at Peterborough) was delayed until 22 September 1628. On 4 May 1629 he was instituted as rector of Careby, Lincolnshire, and it was probably about this time that he married his wife, Elizabeth; they may well have been the John Sheffield and Elizabeth Eastwicke who married at Boston, Lincolnshire, on 2 October 1628. Their eldest son, John, who was at Tonbridge School in 1646 and was admitted to St John's College in May of that year, was born in 1629 or 1630. A daughter, Katherine, and a son, Stephen, were baptized at Careby in 1632 and 1634 respectively; the latter was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in 1648. It is uncertain whether John's two younger sons, Timothy ('bap'. 1654/5) and Nathaniel ('bap'. 1662), were the children of his first wife, Elizabeth, or his second, Barbara (died 1684), whose former name was probably Smith. 
It may be that John Sheffield arrived with his family to take up the ministry at Tonbridge, Kent, following the sequestration in 1643 of Edward Ashburnham, the rector there and a prebendary of Chichester Cathedral, though there is no certain confirmation of his ministering there until July 1647. Soon afterwards, however, Sheffield moved to the parish of St Swithin London Stone, London, where on 7 November 1647 he was elected minister at a meeting of the vestry. He was a signatory on 14 December 1647 of 'A Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, and to our Solemn League and Covenant', and in January 1649 signed as minister of St Swithin 'A Vindication of the Ministers of the Gospel', which deplored the proceedings against Charles I. As all this may suggest, Sheffield was a presbyterian by persuasion. In 1650 he published 'A Good Conscience the Strongest Hold'. The preface, addressed 'To the conscientious reader' advised: 'Conscience is the book of books, the ancientest piece of scripture in the world', lamenting that 'these times of our have been too fruitful in disputes and controversies; in dealing with which there is no end'. A report dated 29 April 1652, which included the information that one minister and three ruling elders were in place at St Swithin, was signed by Sheffield as moderator of the third London classis. But he was formally presented by the Salters' Company to the rectory of St Swithin only on 12 May 1657, signing a grateful preface to the master and officials of the company in his 'The Sinfulness of Evil Thoughts' (1659). In 'The Rising Sun, or, The Sun of Righteousness' (1654) something of the flavour of his ministry at St Swithin is suggested by a preface to his friends there, who 'have had the sum of this discourse preached among you, and divers of you have it written in your note books and repeated in your families'. Sheffield served as an assistant to the London commission for scandalous ministers under the ordinance of 28 August 1654, and was appointed as a commissioner for the approbation of ministers in March 1660. 
In 1660 Sheffield was ejected from St Swithin upon the return of the sequestrated minister. He did not immediately leave the parish, where his son Nathaniel was baptized on 27 March 1662. However, probably shortly afterwards he settled at Enfield, Middlesex. He took the Oxford oath in 1666, and on 15 April 1672 was granted a licence under the declaration of indulgence to teach at his own and two other houses in Enfield. Although, according to Calamy, 'from his youth up was addicted to piety and seriousness', Sheffield 'was one that formed his sermons not from monastic contemplations in his cell, but took for a ground work such things as did occur' in the world around him; perhaps as a result 'a briskness appears in all his writings' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.38-9). John Sheffield was buried at Enfield on 3 August 1680. In his will, dated from there on 26 May 1680 and proved on 17 August 1680, he left property at Enfield and elsewhere to his second wife, Barbara, who died in 1684. 


@@@@@


doc= 25297


Sheffield, John, first duke of Buckingham and Normanby (1647-1721), politician and author, was born on 8 September 1647, the only son of Edmund Sheffield, second earl of Mulgrave (1611-1658), one of Oliver Cromwell's councillors and one of the peers called to the protector's upper house, and Elizabeth Cranfield (1607/8-1672), daughter of Lionel Cranfield, first earl of Middlesex. On his father's death, he succeeded as third earl of Mulgrave. In 1661 his mother married Sir John Bennet, and Mulgrave was sent to France in the care of a private tutor, who took care that he was not caught up in Catholic practices, on one occasion preventing him from kneeling in the street as a procession carrying the host passed by. On his return to England, and to the court, in 1665 Mulgrave undertook a programme of self-education, learning Latin well enough to translate Epicurus and write a commentary on the letters of Cicero. 
In 1666 Mulgrave joined the navy as a volunteer, serving on the flagship of Prince Rupert against the Dutch. On 13 June 1667, with the Dutch threatening to invade England, Mulgrave was made captain of a troop of horse. In November 1669 he challenged John Wilmot, second earl of Rochester, to a duel, believing Rochester had written a satire about him, but Rochester treated the challenge as a joke, arriving at the duel to claim that he was not in good health and unable to proceed. Mulgrave was deeply offended and subsequently held Rochester to be an enemy, although Rochester was probably obeying an order from Charles II not to carry out the duel. Mulgrave served as a volunteer with the fleet at the battle of Solebay on 28 May 1672. He continued to be promoted, becoming a gentleman of the bedchamber, and was appointed commander of the 'Captain', one of the best second-rate vessels in the fleet, in 1673. His army commission was raised to colonel of the 3rd foot, or Old Holland regiment, the same year, and he was nominated knight of the Garter on 23 April 1674, being invested on 28 May. He continued his military education by serving under Marshal Turenne in France. 
Despite these successes, Mulgrave deeply resented that James Scott, duke of Monmouth, eldest illegitimate son of Charles II and from April 1678 captain-general of land forces, opposed his wish to command the 1st troop of Horse Guards. In revenge Mulgrave encouraged the animosity between Monmouth and James, duke of York, the king's brother, suggesting that Monmouth was planning a coup to seize the throne and was manoeuvring himself into a position to accomplish it, while intimating to Monmouth that York had sexual designs on Monmouth's wife. When York and Monmouth fell out Mulgrave benefited handsomely, accepting the positions of governor of Hull and lord lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire that had been stripped from Monmouth. 
The development of Mulgrave's career at court was accompanied by the expansion of his literary interests. He wrote a prologue to a performance at court of Elkanah Settle's 'The Empress of Morocco' in July 1673, alongside another by his rival Rochester. He established a friendly relationship with John Dryden, combining the roles of patron and collaborator. Dryden benefited from Mulgrave's access to Charles II and the duke of York, as well as from financial support. Mulgrave had his attempts at verse corrected by Dryden. In 1676 Mulgrave was the dedicatee of Dryden's 'Aureng-Zebe', a play whose protagonist was a dispossessed prince; the dedication implicitly praised Mulgrave for his loyal partisanship of the duke of York's right to succeed Charles II. Subsequently, in March 1679, Mulgrave collaborated with Dryden on the translation of Ovid's letter from Helen to Paris for Dryden's 'Ovid's Epistles'. Mulgrave was probably the author of the 'Essay on satire' which circulated in manuscript in 1679 and attacked prominent figures at court including the king and Rochester; Dryden was blamed and physically assaulted, but the friendship between patron and poet survived. 
Mulgrave continued to support the court during the exclusion crisis, winning further literary endorsement from Dryden, and consistently voted against attempts to remove the duke of York from the succession in the Lords. In 1680 he commanded a relief expedition to the English garrison at Tangier, but the mission was poorly planned and so badly supplied that it accomplished little. He incurred the king's displeasure by refusing to drink healths to Charles until he and his men were safely landed in a rotting boat they had been assigned, but redeemed himself with a carefully drawn report on the fortifications of Tangier. In 1682 he published the first edition of his 'An Essay upon Poetry', imitating Horace's 'Ars poetica'; it went through several subsequent revised editions during Mulgrave's lifetime. He remained in the king's favour until November 1682, when he was banned from court after gossip circulated that he had seduced the duke of York's daughter Anne. He claimed that it was a harmless flirtation and that he was 'only ogling' her (Gregg, 27), but he was stripped of his offices and remained without employment until 1684, when he was restored to the Holland regiment. 
The accession of James II brought Mulgrave back into full royal favour. In May 1685 he was appointed a gentleman of the bedchamber, on 24 July he joined the privy council, and in October was promoted to lord chamberlain of the household. After a long bachelorhood Mulgrave married at Littlecote Chapel, Ramsbury, Wiltshire, on 18 March 1686; his wife was Ursula (died 1697), widow of Edward Conway, earl of Conway, eldest daughter of George Stawell and Ursula, 'nee' Austen. Her grandfather was the royalist army officer Sir John Stawell. They had no children. James made Mulgrave an ecclesiastical commissioner on 22 November 1686, replacing Laurence Hyde, earl of Rochester, and Mulgrave became closely associated with James's religious policies. He attended mass with the king, but never converted to Catholicism nor took communion. In 1687 he was reappointed lord lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire and also became vice-admiral for Yorkshire and Northumberland. Later Mulgrave excused his accepting a seat on the ecclesiastical commission by claiming that he had no idea the commission was illegal, nor had he intended to take the lieutenancy of the East Riding from Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset, whom James had removed for not introducing the papal nuncio at court. 
In 1688 Mulgrave witnessed the birth of the king's son James Francis Edward, and remained at the king's side in London until James II fled on 11 December 1688. He was one of the peers who met at the Guildhall in London that day and formed the provisional government. He received praise from all sides when he rescued the Spanish ambassador from an anti-Catholic mob and saved the ambassador's house from destruction, thereby preserving England's relationship with Spain, which was sympathetic to William's invasion. He was initially loyal to James, and on learning of James's capture at Faversham led moves for his rescue. When James returned to Whitehall, Mulgrave requested a marquessate, but was rejected. Mulgrave, slighted, abandoned James, supported moves to establish the convention, and in February 1689 voted to accept William and Mary as joint sovereigns. That year he wrote an essay, 'Humanum est errare, or, False steps on both sides', which reflected badly on the conduct of both James and William, but it was never published; the manuscript survives in the British Library. Another essay of this period was 'The character of a tory, in answer to that of a trimmer', replying to the pamphlet by George Savile, marquess of Halifax. 
Mulgrave was not trusted by the new regime. He was not included in the new monarchs' privy council, although in 1691 the lord president, Thomas Osborne, marquess of Carmarthen (formerly earl of Danby), included Mulgrave on a list of candidates for the post of lord lieutenant of Ireland that was sent to William. None the less he drifted into opposition as a non-government tory. In January 1693 he supported the claim of the lords to be allowed to assess their own estates for the land tax. However later that year he opposed the 'Triennial Bill', thereby aligning himself with William, but also protested with the whig leaders Halifax and Charles Talbot, twelfth earl of Shrewsbury, against the renewal of press censorship. As part of the reconstruction of the government to accommodate Shrewsbury in spring 1694, on 3 May he was made a privy councillor, with an annual pension of $3000, and on 10 May was created marquess of Normanby. He attended the cabinet and in November 1694 acted as speaker of the House of Lords during the illness of the lord keeper, Sir John Somers. On 25 January 1695 he replied for the government in the Lords against the speech of the former secretary of state Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham. However, following the uncovering of the Jacobite plot to assassinate William in 1696, Normanby refused to sign the association recognizing William as rightful and lawful king, and on 12 March 1696 was struck off the list of privy councillors by William's own hand. 
Normanby's refusal to abjure James by signing the association won him the praise of Dryden in the 'Dedication of the Aeneis', but he was again out of office with little prospect of return. He emphasized that he was not a supporter of Catholic hegemony in England by publishing in 1696 'The Character of Charles II, King of England, with a Short Account of his being Poyson'd', which insinuated that Charles had been murdered by Catholics in order to ensure the accession of the allegedly more pliant James II. In November 1696 he joined the duke of Leeds (formerly Carmarthen) in opposing the government proposal to extend the privileges of the Bank of England, and opposed the attainder of the Jacobite conspirator Sir John Fenwick. On 12 March 1699 he married his second wife, Katherine (died 1704), widow of Wriothesley Noel, second earl of Gainsborough, and daughter of Fulke Greville, fifth Baron Brooke of Beauchamp's Court, and Sarah, 'nee' Dashwood. This marriage was also childless. Normanby opposed settling the English succession on the house of Hanover, and in debates on the 'Act of Settlement' in 1701 suggested that Prince George of Denmark should have preference over the Hanoverians in inheriting the throne. Although frequently criticized for switching sides from James II to William and Mary, Normanby's course during the 1690s rarely led him to power and he seems to have genuinely followed his conscience, frequently to his detriment. 
Normanby's allies in opposition were defenders of the high-church position, and with them he moved closer to William III following the decision of Louis XIV to recognize the son of James II as James III following the dethroned monarch's death in 1701. On 2 January 1702 Normanby proposed the Lords' address of thanks to William III, which expressed the peers' hostility to Louis. Following the accession of Queen Anne, who remembered her former admirer fondly, as well as his courtesy towards her husband, he was reappointed to the privy council on 21 April 1702, and became lord privy seal on 2 May. He also became lord lieutenant of the North Riding of Yorkshire. In cabinet he argued against Anne's orders that the Electress Sophia of Hanover be included in prayers for the royal family, and thought that England should be an auxiliary member of the grand alliance and use the war against France to improve her colonial position and avoid a lengthy entanglement on land. Nevertheless, he survived the removal of Rochester from office in February 1703, and Anne showed her continued support for him by creating him duke of Buckingham and Normanby on 23 March 1703. As the letters patent specified that he was to be 'duke of the county of Buckingham', he was sometimes referred to as duke of Buckinghamshire. 
Buckingham's promotion may have been intended to show the high-church interest that they were still regarded highly by the queen, but it was seen as an inconvenience by the lord treasurer, Sidney Godolphin, first earl of Godolphin, who wanted to secure the ministry by making it more acceptable to the whigs. Sarah Churchill, duchess of Marlborough, the keeper of the queen's privy purse, also resented Buckingham's influence over court administration and the permission the queen had given him to build a town residence, Buckingham House, on the western edge of St James's Park. Buckingham was gradually forced from office during 1704; his pension ceased to be paid, rumours spread that he was intriguing with the tory opposition, and on 23 March 1705 he was dismissed from his offices. His removal was criticized in a pamphlet, 'The Memorial of the Church of England' (1705), which portrayed Buckingham as a friend of the church, wronged by Anne, whose dismissal left the church open to attack from the duke of Marlborough, Godolphin, and their whig allies. It was cited in an acrimonious debate in the Lords that December, when Buckingham and Rochester were attacked as responsible for it as part of a campaign to discredit the queen and her whig ministers. In November 1705 he was one of the ringleaders of the tory scheme to embarrass the queen and ministry by inviting the Electress Sophia to reside in England. On 20 May 1707 he was removed from the privy council. Later that year Robert Harley and Godolphin planned to include him in an abortive ministerial reconstruction that would have freed the ministry from reliance on the junto whigs. 
Buckingham's interests outside politics at this time included the construction of Buckingham House from a design executed (but perhaps not originated) by William Winde. The house was built between 1703 and 1705 and led Buckingham's enemy at court, the duchess of Marlborough, to invite him to advise on the construction of Marlborough House, also in St James's Park, in 1709. He also became a patron of the poet Alexander Pope. On 16 March 1706, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, he married Katherine (1681/2-1743), widow of James Annesley, third earl of Anglesey, and previously Lady Katherine Darnley, illegitimate daughter of James II and Catharine Sedley, suo jure countess of Dorchester. The new duchess was a Jacobite sympathizer, and the marriage served to identify Buckingham further with high toryism. They had two daughters and three sons, only one of whom, Edmund (1716-1735), survived to adulthood. The second son was Robert Sheffield, marquess of Normanby. Buckingham already had at least two children out of wedlock. A relationship with Frances Stewart, wife of Oliver Lambart, younger son of Charles, third earl of Cavan, resulted in the birth of a son, Charles Herbert, later Sir Charles Sheffield, first baronet ('c'.1706-1774), who eventually inherited the Normanby estate in Lincolnshire. An illegitimate daughter from an earlier relationship, Mary Sheffield (died 1729), married Arthur Annesley, fourth Baron Altham (1688/9-1727), and may have been the mother of the peerage claimant James Annesley. 
Buckingham had connections with financiers in the City of London -- he was a proprietor in the East India Company -- and Harley made use of these to secure city support for a future Harley-led ministry. Buckingham returned to office when Harley formed a tory-based ministry in 1710, becoming a privy councillor once more and lord steward of the household; in June 1711 he was promoted to lord president of the council, and also that year recovered the lord lieutenancies of the north and east ridings of Yorkshire, as well as gaining that of Middlesex. He was also appointed one of the lords justices, who were to carry out administration between the queen's death and the arrival of her successor from Hanover. Following the accession of George I he was removed from all his offices, including his place on the privy council, despite his long correspondence with the Hanoverian court. 
Buckingham devoted the rest of his life to literary pursuits. He supported Pope's 'Iliad' and in 1717 contributed verse to 'Poems on Several Occasions' alongside Pope and Anne Finch, countess of Winchilsea. He also restructured Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar' in accordance with early eighteenth-century tastes, dividing it into two independent works, 'The Tragedy of Julius Caesar' and 'The Death of Marcus Brutus', introducing new characters and inserting love scenes, and scaling back the importance of the Roman citizenry. Pope contributed two of the choruses placed between the acts. Buckingham's poetry was witty and cynical, as in his derisive commentary on the morals, manners, and personal hygiene of the Parisians. 
Buckingham died at Buckingham House on 24 February 1721, and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 25 March 1721. He was succeeded as second duke of Buckingham and Normanby by his son, Edmund, upon whose death all his titles became extinct. At the request of the duchess Pope edited Buckingham's works for publication, but before Pope's edition could be published an unauthorized collection was released in 1721 by Edmund Curll. Pope's version appeared on 24 January 1723, but the books were seized by the government as 'in some Part of these Volumes great Reflections are cast upon the late happy Revolution' (Mack, 396), forcing the excision of 'Some account of the revolution', where Buckingham had insinuated that William III had come to England with the deliberate intention of seizing the throne, and 'A feast of the gods', where Buckingham commented that the Dutch were 'remarkable for industry, and for having no one good quality besides' (ibid.). The two essays were published separately -- in London as 'The Castrations' in 1723 and in The Hague as 'Buckingham Restor'd' in 1727 -- and included in the fourth edition of Buckingham's works in 1740. Samuel Johnson wrote of him that 'His verses are often insipid, but his memoirs are lively and agreeable; he had the perspicuity and elegance of an historian, but not the fire and fancy of a poet' (Johnson). 


@@@@@


doc= 25298


Sheffield, John (1653/4-1726), Presbyterian minister, was born at Ibstock, Leicestershire, the son of William Sheffield (died 1673), who was rector at Ibstock from 1644 to 1662. After attending Kibworth grammar school John Sheffield was sent to learn a trade, but he was eager to enter the ministry and began to study under John Shuttlewood, ejected clergyman and in the 1660s an itinerant preacher in Leicestershire, accompanying him from one hiding place to the next. In December 1668 Shuttlewood, Sheffield, and others were surprised at a conventicle. The next day Sheffield was required by the local magistrate to state 'when he had been at his parish church to hear Divine Service' and whether he would go next Sunday, but 'answered that he did not know how Divine Providence might dispose of him before that time' (Pearse, 79). He was sent to Leicester gaol in the custody of Charles Gibbons, quartermaster of the trained bands. In 1672 an attempt was made to distrain his goods, despite his possession of a licence. In 1674 Sheffield was living at Lubenham, Leicestershire, where he was visited by his old friend Gibbons, 'roaring into his congregation after his wonted manner'; a warrant was secured 'to distrain upon Mr Sh for forty pounds: And the officers took away seven milch cows of Mr Sheffields' which were sold for $7 and the proceeds paid to the justices (ibid., 81). Eventually Sheffield found a position as chaplain to Mrs Palmer at Temple Hall, in the parish of Sibson, Leicestershire. There he married; although his wife's name is unknown, they had at least two daughters, Letitia and Lydia, and two sons, Nathaniel, a lawyer, and the eldest child, William, born in 1682, who became a dissenting minister at Buckingham, Windsor, and later Haverhill, Suffolk. 
On 27 September 1682 Sheffield was ordained by Shuttlewood and three other ejected ministers. Two meeting-houses were built for him, probably in 1689, at Temple Hall and at Atherstone, Warwickshire, where he had also begun preaching. In the early 1690s he was granted $4 a year for his pastoral work at Appleby, Leicestershire, by the managers of the Common Fund of Presbyterian and Independent ministers, and continued to receive this support until 1703. He himself was elected to serve as a fund manager in 1697. Also in that year, he succeeded as minister of the Presbyterian congregation in St Thomas Street, Southwark. He was a friend of the philosopher John Locke, whom he visited at Oates, near High Laver. In the Salters' Hall debates of 1719 he sided with the non-subscribers. In March 1720, when his son Nathaniel was admitted as a student of the Middle Temple, John Sheffield was given as resident of Queen Street, Southwark. Despite his earlier stormy relationships with the authorities, Sheffield has been described as akin to Richard Baxter in his views. According to Calamy: 'He was much for catholic Christianity: and therefore did he the less relish the National Establishment, and therefore was he the more contented to renounce the emoluments of it, because he thought it set up such a sort of uniformity as hindered unity, and turned the national church into a mere party. (Calamy, 37)' Judging from Calamy's gruesome account of the results of the autopsy, Sheffield must have spent his last years in agony, eventually succumbing to stone of the bladder and kidneys on 24 January 1726, aged seventy-two. He probably died in Southwark. 


@@@@@


doc= 25299


Sheffield, Sir Robert (b. before 1462, d. 1518), lawyer and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son of Robert Sheffield ('c'.1430-1502), a lawyer and administrator of South Cave, Yorkshire, and his wife, Jane Lounde. It was through his mother that the younger Robert Sheffield became lord of West Butterwick, Lincolnshire. Trained in the Inner Temple, of which he became a governor in 1511, he had become recorder of London by 21 September 1495, and served in that office until April 1508. Consequently he was 'ex officio' an MP for London in 1495, 1497, and 1504. Knighted by Henry VII after the battle of Blackheath (17 June 1497), by way of thanking the city for its loyalty, in 1504 Sheffield attracted some odium for failing to defend its corporate privileges. In 1497 Giles, Lord Daubeney (died 1508), tried to buy Sheffield the speakership, but was outbid. From about 1508-9, by now 'of counsel' to the king, Sheffield largely retired to his county, receiving royal grants of several stewardships around Lincoln; by 1516 he was Lindsey's 'custos rotulorum'. He probably represented Lincolnshire in the parliaments of 1512 and 1515, but London still paid him an annuity to be mindful of its interests. In February 1512 he was 'elected' speaker, the crown paying him $300 for the three sessions held between then and 4 March 1514 -- an inflated rate. 
In 1515 Sheffield helped Thomas Wolsey (died 1530) to pilot his resumption bill through parliament. However, in the same parliament Sheffield's support for the renewal of an act of 1512, denying benefit of clergy to men not in holy orders, appears to have aroused Wolsey's hostility, and in the following year he was arraigned in Star Chamber, charged with negligence as a JP. He had to give recognizances for 8000 marks, and was dismissed from the county bench. He obtained a pardon in November 1516, but his complaints to the king against the cardinal caused Wolsey to have Sheffield imprisoned in the Tower of London, before bringing him back into Star Chamber, accused of obtaining his pardon without licence and also of harbouring a killer (on which there may have been a real case to answer). Returned to the Tower, he may have died there, on 10 August 1518, though the church of the Austin friars, in which he chose to be buried, adjoined not only the Tower but probably also Sheffield's own house -- his first wife, Ellen, the daughter of Sir John Delves of Doddington, Cheshire, was buried in the friary church. Ellen died in or after 1509, and Sheffield later married Anne Barlee (died 1558?), daughter of William Barlee, of Albury, Hertfordshire. His son and heir, Robert (died 1531), the child of his first marriage, married Jane Stanley, sister of Thomas Stanley, second earl of Derby; their son Edmund Sheffield became first Baron Sheffield in 1547. After Sir Robert's death in 1518 the second Lady Sheffield was twice remarried, to Sir John Grey, of Blisworth, Northamptonshire, and to Sir Richard Clement, of Ightham Mote, Kent; her will was dated 1 October 1557 and was proved on 7 May 1558. 


@@@@@


doc= 25300


Sheil, Sir Justin (1803-1871), army officer in the East India Company and diplomatist, son of Edward Sheil, merchant, and his wife, Catherine ('nee' MacCarthy), of Spring House, co. Tipperary, and brother of Richard Lalor Sheil, was born at Rathpatrick, co. Kilkenny, on 2 December 1803. Educated at Stonyhurst College, he was nominated to an East India cadetship. On arriving in India he was posted as ensign to the 3rd Bengal infantry (4 March 1820). Exchanged to the 35th Bengal infantry, of which he became adjutant, he was present at the siege of Bharatpur (1826). He became a captain on 13 April 1830, and on 4 July 1833 was appointed second in command of the disciplined troops in Persia under Colonel Pasmore, who had specially recommended him to Lord W. Bentinck for this service. Pasmore wrote that he was sensible, well-informed, and conciliatory. On 16 February 1836 he was appointed secretary to the British legation in Persia, and in 1844 he succeeded Sir John McNeill as envoy and minister at the shah's court, and continued such until he retired in 1854. He married in 1847, Mary Leonora (died 1869), only daughter of the Rt Hon. Stephen Woulfe, chief baron of the Irish exchequer. He contributed to his wife's book, 'Glimpses of Life and Manners in Persia' (1856), and two articles in the journal of the Royal Geographical Society. He had been promoted to the rank of major on 17 February 1841, and became a major-general in 1859. In 1848 he was created a CB, and in 1855 a KCB. He died at 13 Eaton Place, London, on 17 April 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 25301


Sheil, Richard Lalor (1791-1851), playwright and politician, was born on 17 August 1791 at Drumdowney, co. Kilkenny, the eldest of the four sons of Edward Sheil and Catherine McCarthy of Spring House, co. Tipperary. Edward Sheil was one of a burgeoning and successful Irish Catholic mercantile middle class. He purchased an estate and married into a family with aristocratic connections. For his eldest son he planned a professional career. As Richard Sheil later explained, in an autobiographical aside to a parliamentary committee, a Catholic who made money in trade considered it a feather in his own cap if he made his son a barrister, for the bar in Ireland enjoyed more station than in England because of the absence in the former country of persons of real rank. Educated initially by a resident tutor in the person of a refugee French priest, he was then dispatched to a school in Kensington run by French Jesuits settled in England. Its emigre character and the language of much of the instruction ensured that precious little sense of Britishness was inculcated here. However, he was transferred to the intensely English Roman Catholic environment of Stonyhurst College in Lancashire in October 1804. He found a role model among the members of staff -- a mind steeped in classical knowledge, with highly polished manners and great eloquence -- and was taught to be loyal to the constitution and liberties of Britain despite the religious discrimination to which Catholics were subjected. As much as Sheil resented those remaining disabilities which threatened to restrict the reach of his ambition, he emerged from Stonyhurst not only with an understanding of English Catholic opinion -- which was invariably more moderate than Irish -- but also well indoctrinated in the glories of the British nation. Hence his later claim that he was 'as devoted to the maintenance of the glory, the honour, and the power of this great country' as any native born Englishman (MacNevin, 202). 
Admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, in November 1807, Sheil graduated in July 1811 and subsequently kept terms at Lincoln's Inn for the requisite two years before being called to the Irish bar. These years brought the first crisis in his life, when his father was reduced to virtual bankruptcy. He completed his university education with the assistance of a small allowance from a member of his mother's family, and sought to cover the costs of setting up and establishing himself in his profession through playwriting. His interest in literature and drama -- first awakened at Stonyhurst -- had developed at Trinity. Beginning in 1814, and over a period of a decade, he earned a modest but useful income with a succession of plays, eight in all, which made him something of a favourite of contemporary literary critics. His taste was for sentimentality and horrors, perhaps a reflection of a desire more to dazzle the audience with staging than dramatic content, hence his anxiety to secure Eliza O'Neill (1791-1872), one of the most celebrated actresses of the day, for starring roles. His one enduring success was 'Evadne, or, The Statue', which reworked Shirley's 'The Traitor' (1635) and has been described as an illustration of the nineteenth-century mind at work on Jacobean drama. The heavy emphasis on infidelity and sin is lightened by a resolution which sees a happier triumph of Sheil's heroine than Shirley's. Performed some thirty times at Covent Garden during its first season, it was staged again as late as 1881. 
Sheil's choice of a bride in 1816 may have been influenced not merely by her physical attractions but also by her connections. She was the niece of the master of the rolls, William McMahon, who had the ability to promote a legal career. However, Sheil's increasingly conspicuous participation in the agitation for Catholic relief saw him shunned by his wife's cautious relative, who had been born into a Catholic family but conformed to the established church. All the master ever gave him was breakfast, he later joked. Nevertheless, his practice did slowly prosper despite his refusal to give it his full attention. And when, shortly after the birth of his only son on 9 January 1822, his wife died, Sheil found solace not at the bar but in popular literature. He began to publish a series of sketches of his contemporaries in the profession. First appearing in the 'New Monthly Magazine', but subsequently expanded to embrace political figures and events, and republished in book form, they were characterized by grace, wit, and generosity. They won a wide and admiring readership and even helped to facilitate a reconciliation with Daniel O'Connell, with whom he clashed over political strategy. Many of the articles, including that on O'Connell, were in fact the work of his friend and collaborator William Henry Curran. But O'Connell assumed, as did most contemporaries, that they all came from Sheil's pen ('Sketches of the Irish Bar') and was surprised by its tone given the bitter nature of their dispute. 
A rigorous training in rhetoric at Stonyhurst, membership of the Trinity College Historical Society, and of the Eccentrics debating club during his terms at Lincoln's Inn, provided Sheil with a firm grounding in public speaking and the confidence to seek to master his natural defects as an orator. Painfully self-conscious about his diminutive size, and struggling always to modulate his high-pitched voice, Sheil quickly concluded that passion was his key to capturing and holding the attention of an audience. He cultivated the arts of the demagogue. He was blessed with 'as fine a pair of eyes as ever graced a human head -- large, deeply set, dark, liquid, flasing like gems' -- which fixed listeners 'like a basilisk' and helped them to forget all else about his appearance ('Blackwood's Magazine', 30 (1831), 411). When he spoke he deliberately sought to sweep his listeners away with passages of poetic beauty, savage satire, and unrestrained emotion. 'Sheil possesses in eminent degree the surprising faculty of exciting himself to the verge of delirium without once losing his complete self-possession', commented a French listener. 'I was seduced, I was dazzled, and together with me, the whole assembly' (McCullagh, 'Memoirs of Sheil', 1.310-11). These were the emerging skills he put, while still an undergraduate, at the service of Catholic emancipation, and one of that cause's leading lights admiringly observed that he had seldom seen a youth from college quite so well informed. 
Yet Roman Catholics were far from united, either by rank or in strategy. Those of the highest social rank, together with a more substantial number of professional men and merchants, and English Catholics, were willing to try to facilitate emancipation through concessions to liberal protestant opinion, such as a crown veto over Catholic episcopal appointments. His education at Stonyhurst, his political pragmatism, his rank, his personal desire for full and equal citizenship in the British nation, made Sheil a natural vetoist. This was the issue which eventually brought him into acrimonious conflict with Daniel O'Connell, the uncompromising leader of the anti-vetoists. Convinced that an obdurate O'Connell was delaying emancipation, he launched a stinging personal attack on his adversary in 1821. Not that Sheil was a match for O'Connell in the art of personal abuse. The latter savagely ridiculed the younger man's pretensions as a dramatist and style as a speaker. Only with great difficulty were friends able to dissuade Sheil from completing the breach in Catholic ranks by challenging O'Connell to a duel. The two men did combine early in 1822 on an address of welcome to a new viceroy, Richard Wellesley, whose appointment they both unwisely regarded as the harbinger of emancipation, and were formally reconciled at a dinner party on 8 February 1823, at which the decision was taken to reinvigorate the emancipation agitation through the agency of a new Catholic Association. 
Sheil's contribution to the successful launch of this powerful instrument of extra-parliamentary popular pressure was widely recognized as second only to that of O'Connell. Suppressing his initial doubts about the mobilization of the lower orders, he loyally supported the decisions to embrace the entire range of peasant grievances and to offer inexpensive associate memberships as means of binding the masses more closely to the cause while filling association coffers. He tirelessly toured the provinces delivering inspirational harangues, and was paired with O'Connell in the deputation dispatched to London early in 1825 in an unavailing effort to defend the association from suppression and advance emancipation. They testified before parliamentary committees, with Sheil developing the familiar themes of a justice system blighted by aristocratic and religious bias. Further, he avowed that removal of the impediments to advancement in his profession would lead him to retire from politics. It may have been this assurance which prompted O'Connell privately to describe his examination as 'most comical'. Sheil also renounced his support of the veto, insisted that emancipation would remove priests from politics and that Roman Catholics would accept higher franchise qualifications in return for relief, and declared that those who still qualified as voters would not show a partiality in elections for their fellow religionists. However, the impact of his evidence was lessened by his interrogators' scepticism that the lower orders would long be content with a measure which directly benefited only their betters. Similarly, his credibility was damaged by his past demagogic excesses. 
Bitterly disappointed by the failure of emancipation to soar even with a pair of protestant 'wings', Sheil was in the vanguard of the new association and its more aggressive politicization of the enfranchised lower orders. Like O'Connell, he publicly expressed regret for his earlier willingness to sacrifice their voting rights on the altar of relief. He also retreated from his earlier opposition to any concession of a special position to priests in the struggle for emancipation. They clearly had a vital role to play in the staging of freeholder uprisings against landlord electoral domination. He played his part in the limited uprising of 1826, which to his mind amounted to a political revolution because the people had at last been taught to know their rights. Sheil it was who interested the French press in the Irish problem, much to the embarrassment of the government, and he proposed a series of imaginative measures, such as a Catholic census and simultaneous parish meetings, to re-emphasize the numerical supremacy of Catholics in Ireland and their wholehearted commitment to the cause. Indeed, he consistently encouraged his fellow religionists to recognize the power their number gave them to intimidate and extract concessions without a resort to violence. And when O'Connell made the fateful decision to contest the by-election in County Clare in 1828, Sheil served as his counsel and campaigned on his behalf. 
Sheil's personal ambition following emancipation in 1829 was to make the difficult transition from agitator to politician, and even to statesman. He was assisted by his marriage on 20 July 1830 to Anastasia Power ('nee' Lalor), a wealthy widow, for he was at last ensured of financial security. But his years of demagoguery, and not least a pitiless attack on the character of the duke of York in 1826, had made him powerful enemies. Indeed, he had been saved from prosecution in 1827 only by the formation of the brief Canning administration. A proposal originating with a viceroy that he be put into parliament was resisted by prime minister Wellington, even though many tories were keen to exploit the differences which were re-emerging between Sheil and O'Connell over the latter's turning to the issue of repeal of the union: Sheil was still willing to reconcile himself to the status of a west Briton. He was called to the inner bar in 1830, while O'Connell continued to be denied a silk gown and was left to fume at this studied insult. Sheil did dicker with the tories for a parliamentary seat, but remained unacceptable to Wellington, whose distrust of him extended to the issue of parliamentary reform. The formation of a whig government in 1830 appeared to enhance his prospects, for even those leading lights who visited Ireland and left scornful of its people and scenery were impressed with Sheil. Moreover, he proffered his services as a parliamentary counterweight to O'Connell. Indeed, the Liberator's suspicion that Sheil was provided with a seat for the purpose of 'abusing' him was not entirely unfounded. Temporarily accommodated with the rotten borough of Milbourne Port, Sheil entered the Commons on 8 March 1831. The dissolution two months later saw him returned for co. Louth, having unsuccessfully contested it in 1830, but this time he had the backing of the viceroy's extensive local interest. Nevertheless, disillusionment with whig policy in Ireland, a visceral dislike of Edward Stanley, the Conservative chief secretary, and the apparent unwillingness of ministers to reward him with office, led him to make his peace with O'Connell and secure election for co. Tipperary as a repealer in 1833. This prompted accusations that he was a mere 'mercenary' whose loyalty could only be purchased with favours, and his reputation was further sullied early in 1834 when he found himself at the centre of an ugly controversy over the English complaint that Irish members were 'perfect swindlers' who privately supported legislation which publicly they opposed. He weathered the crisis with the staunch support of O'Connell, and warmly advocated the latter's informal arrangement with the whigs which restored them to office under Melbourne in 1835, following a brief tory hiatus. 
Sheil rebuilt his parliamentary career and reputation on the strength of his oratory. Careful not to speak too often and coldly calculating in the timing of his interventions, he devoted days to the preparation of his speeches and on occasion took rooms so as to be able to rehearse at full volume. He was equally careful to ensure their publication, making an arrangement with the 'Morning Chronicle' in 1835. Alternately employing the stiletto of irony and the cudgel of sarcasm, he made repeated appeals for religious and political equality in Ireland, though even to sympathetic listeners he appeared to undervalue the importance of social grievances as sources of discontent; he memorably castigated the former, and future, tory lord chancellor, Lyndhurst, for his offensive dismissal of the Irish as aliens in blood, language, and religion; eloquently defended the whig commitment to conciliation of Ireland, as distinct from tory coercion; evoked the historic memory of centuries of misgovernment to explain Irish lawlessness; and distanced himself from O'Connell's resurrection during the late 1830s of repeal. All of this time he was assiduously pursuing office. In 1836 he requested the vice-treasurership of Ireland, only now to learn of the insuperable opposition of William IV who had neither forgotten nor forgiven the attack a decade earlier on his brother. In 1838, following the accession of Victoria, he received a demeaning offer of the clerkship of the ordnance, which he naturally declined. He did subsequently accept the commissionership of Greenwich Hospital. Senior whigs objected to a more senior post because of his commitment to the (secret) ballot, which he believed would provide Irish tenants with greater protection from the political tyranny of landlords. Not that he was long content, and within a few months he was soliciting closer connection with the government on the grounds that this alone could help him justify to his constituents his refusal to stand with O'Connell. In 1839 he sought the vacant vice-presidency of the Board of Trade, explaining beseechingly that his 'great object' was to hold such an office if only for a short period. A fragile ministry desperate to bolster its support in the Commons duly appeased him. And when Melbourne undertook a last minute reconstruction of his government in 1841, he finally appointed Sheil to the position he had long sought, that of judge advocate. Melbourne's earlier objection to this promotion had been the fact that it would give an Irish Roman Catholic and an 'agitator' frequent access to the queen as well as control of the discipline of the army. However, now asked whether the appointment would be disliked, she surprisingly replied that she would not object because she had a 'high opinion' of Sheil. 
The 1841 general election, a tory triumph, found Sheil sitting for the less taxing constituency of Dungarvan. Throughout the Peel administration he continued to make his mark as a trenchant critic of the government. At the same time, he spoke as one of a handful of Irish Liberal Unionists who continued to urge the conciliation of their native land as an alternative to O'Connell's ever more popular demand for repeal. Nevertheless, perhaps to retain his credibility in Ireland, he served in 1844 as counsel to one of the traversers, John O'Connell, in the trials which followed the suppression of the monster repeal meetings. In a long and powerful opening address, whose wide publicity he had thoughtfully arranged before leaving London, he restated his conviction that Ireland's grievances were rooted in the colonial attitude of Britain. 'The union has never been carried into effect', he protested, having long since warned that to draw 'odious distinctions' between England and Ireland, to insist that they required different laws, was to provide repealers with a more 'plausible pretence' that they also required different lawgivers (MacNevin, 291). The year 1845 was largely devoted to desperate attempts to halt the deterioration in the health of his son, only for him to die on the island of Madeira in November. Sheil was on hand the following spring, however, to participate in the ousting of Peel and receive a reward. He was appointed master of the Royal Mint, which he flattered himself was an office just below cabinet rank. The last politician to occupy the position, but the first Roman Catholic to be sworn a member of the privy council since the reign of James II, it fell to him to announce the government's compromise with the demands for decimalization by minting a florin at one-tenth of a pound. Unfortunately, the omission of the traditional Latin contractions for 'By grace of God defender of the faith' from the side bearing the queen's image was regarded in some quarters as a sinister manifestation of the master's religion. Instead, the simplified inscription had been suggested by Prince Albert, but Sheil was obliged to apologize for the change, which was corrected on the second issue of the coin in 1851. He was more successful in the appointment in February 1848 of a royal commission, with himself in the chair, to examine the structure and expenses of the mint, but resigned the mastership before any of its recommendations could be implemented. 
During these years Sheil spoke infrequently, and rarely at length, in the house. He did pay a short tribute to O'Connell following the Liberator's death in May 1847 and took this opportunity briefly to discuss the famine. He denied that it was merely a provincial problem, acknowledged that some men had permitted 'national kindness' to be overcome 'by their austere political economy' and observed that Britain would happily spend a fortune on a war. Irish gratitude for assistance, he added, would be commensurate with English generosity ('Hansard 3', 93.1013-16). 
By 1850 Sheil was anxious to retire from the political fray, having long suffered painfully from gout and having become alarmingly dependent on an opiate which friends feared was far from safe. Further, the 'infamous ingratitude of this vile populace' made his return for Dungarvan increasingly problematic (Sheil to Hope, 6 Aug 1847, NL Ire., Wyse MS 15026). In 1848 Russell had seriously considered dispatching him to Greece as minister there. On 4 November 1850 he did nominate him minister to Tuscany. The allure of Italy was its history and gentler climate, while Florence had been the scene of Shirley's play which had been the basis of his greatest success as a dramatist. However, in departing a Britain convulsed by a frenzy of anti-Catholicism released by the pope's announcement of the restoration of a Catholic hierarchy in England, and Russell's unfortunate Durham letter, Sheil entertained hopes of being the instrument of reconciliation between faith and nation, hence his determined assertion of his authority over the resident British agent in Rome. But he was denied the time in which to achieve anything of substance. He arrived in Florence on 26 January 1851 and died suddenly, probably of a heart attack, on the morning of Sunday 25 May, only two days after he and his wife received the tragic news of her son's death in Ireland. Following an impressive funeral at the church of San Michelino, attended by Tuscan ministers and the entire diplomatic corps, Mrs Sheil requested as a final mark of respect that the body be transported home to Ireland aboard a naval vessel. Only after much dithering was this done. Sheil's remains were delivered to Dublin on 24 February 1852, and interred at his home, Long Orchard, co. Tipperary. 
If Sheil's career, and life, expired in the relative diplomatic obscurity of the Tuscany mission, this was a fate he had invited. Indeed, the sense of anticlimax had long been palpable. His fame had been won at a very young age, first as a dramatist and then as a demagogue. Yet few of his plays had enjoyed more than transitory success, and his reputation as a dramatist was to suffer because of their lack of realism. His powers of speech did see him make the transition from agitator to orator. Giants on the parliamentary stage, such as Gladstone and Disraeli, singled him out for praise, yet within two generations of his death Justin McCarthy could write that he was nothing more than an orator, that he had failed to leave a mark on parliament or politics and had allowed his career to fade away into 'second class ministerial office'. There is a large measure of truth in the last accusation. Nevertheless, Lecky did embrace him as one of the 'Leaders of Public Opinion in Ireland' and acknowledged that his speeches met Burke's test of perfect oratory -- 'half poetry, half prose' -- but was critical of the profusion of ornaments and the paucity of spontaneity. There have been modern echoes of this criticism, with both his literary style and his public speaking dismissed as 'stilted'. 
Such cavils do less than justice to Sheil. Fashions in oratory inevitably change over time, but in his day Sheil captivated members of parliament just as earlier he had swept away throngs of Irishmen. Moreover, there was a consistent and modernist theme to his many well-constructed and carefully crafted speeches on Ireland. He argued that inequalities -- economic, social, sectarian, and political -- were breeders of discontent and violence. 'If something not be done by those who ought to derive a warning from the past', he repeatedly cautioned, if they 'do not in time adopt the measures requisite to correct abuses proved and indisputable, the next requisition for change, which shall be made, perhaps by an excited people, will be far more formidable than that which we propose, and may lead to consequences by which the worst prognostications may be realized. (MacNevin, 254)' He voiced the fear that 'the spirit of eminence and masterdom' was 'so fixedly settled' in the English that they could never bring themselves to regard Irishmen as their equals ('Hansard 3', 87.1013). 
That Sheil placed the greatest emphasis on existing political inequalities reflected his personal ambition for advancement and desire for full integration within the United Kingdom. No doubt his political reputation has suffered because he was found, eventually, on the wrong side of history. Persuaded that repeal was a dead end, he accepted the status of a west Briton. Unlike O'Connell, he never spoke of his 'hatred' of Britain. However, he has received his due from modern historians of Catholic emancipation. His alliance with O'Connell has been described as 'absolutely crucial' to the successful launching of the Catholic Association (O'Ferrall, 31); James Reynolds has pointed out that the two men shared national popularity, while the Liberator's most recent biographer has acknowledged him as 'the foremost observer and delineator of the immediate in the Association' (Macdonagh, 'The Hereditary Bondsman', 244). 


@@@@@


doc= 25302


Sheilds, Alexander (1659/60-1700), Presbyterian minister, was born at Haughhead, Earlston, Berwickshire, the son of a farmer, James Shields. Alexander attended Edinburgh University, graduating MA on 7 April 1675 'with no small applause'. After graduation he remained to study theology at Edinburgh under the tutelage of Lawrence Charteris, the son of Principal Henry Charteris, who like his father taught divinity at the university until he resigned because of the 'Test Act' which forced many covenanters from office. In 1679 Sheild's own covenanting convictions led him, along with others, to flee Scotland for the Netherlands where, in 1680, he continued his theological studies at Utrecht. 
After returning to Scotland he went to London, where he served as amanuensis to John Owen, the puritan theologian. Sheilds was licensed to preach by Scottish Presbyterians in London on the persuasion of Nicholas Blaikie, the minister of the Scottish church at Founder's Hall, Lothbury. However, Sheilds's unwillingness as a covenanter to take the oath of allegiance, and his preaching against such an oath, brought him to the attention of authorities who after 1684 sought strict enforcement of the oath. His name became linked in November 1684 to that of James Renwick initially through Sheilds's adherence to the 'Apologetical declaration' issued by the United Societies, an affiliation of covenanters to which Renwick belonged. 
Sheilds was arrested by the city marshal at an illegal conventicle at Embroiderers' Hall, Gutter Lane, in Cheapside, on 11 January 1685, along with seven others. He was granted bail to appear at the Guildhall on 14 January. Sheilds failed to appear before the court and consequently forfeited his bail. He did appear on 20 January, but gave no account of his views and was committed to Newgate until the next quarter sessions, which were to be held on 23 February. Following Charles II's death on 6 February the decision was made to remit Sheilds and his compatriots to Scotland's judgment on 5 March, without benefit of an English trial. He was examined by the Scottish privy council on 14 March and subsequently (23 and 25 March) also by the lords justices. In all of these appearances Sheilds reportedly declined 'direct answers'. Finally, on 26 March, he was forced on pain of torture to sign the statement he described as his 'fatal fall', renouncing all activities in which he engaged 'in so far as they declare war against the king'. Unfortunately for him, a letter to his friend John Balfour of Kinloch, in which he expressed his regret at having falsely signed this statement, was intercepted by officials who sent archbishops Arthur Ross and Alexander Cairncross and Bishop Andrew Bruce to question Sheilds. On 6 August Sheilds was again brought before the lords justices who sentenced him to imprisonment on the Bass Rock. After fourteen months' imprisonment he escaped in November 1686 disguised as a woman and sought out James Renwick. 
Despite Sheilds's defection and 'fall' Renwick accepted him back into the covenanters' fold and helped him to regain the trust of members of the societies. Sheilds assisted in revising the 'Informatory vindication', the classic apologetical text of the Cameronians or Society people. Sheilds's own book, 'A Hind Let Loose', also written at this time, offers a historical defence of the position he and Renwick took. Sheilds reveals the depths of his own struggle with this position in his 22 December confession to a gathering of Renwick's followers of the guilt he suffered for 'owning the so-called authority of James VII'. 
In 1687 Sheilds returned to Utrecht to seek the publication of both the 'Informatory vindication' and his own work, travelling back to Scotland when both books were at press (both were published in 1687). Upon publication, 'A Hind Let Loose' was so feared by authorities in Edinburgh that copies were ordered to be destroyed. After Renwick was executed at the Grassmarket, Edinburgh, on 17 February 1688 on a charge of treason, Sheilds engaged in the same kind of open field preaching which had characterized Renwick's work. In April 1688 he denounced the execution at a gathering at Distinkhorn Hill in Galston parish, Kyle Stewart, and memorialized Renwick in 'An Elegie upon the Death of Mr. James Renwick' (1688) and at greater length in the posthumously published 'The Life and Death of Mr. James Renwick' (1724). 
Sheilds became a vigorous apologist for the Cameronians and, with Thomas Lining and William Boyd, served as one of the societies' three ministers. He approved of the societies' 1688 insurrection under the leadership of Daniel Ker, in which ministers of churches in the west of Scotland were forcibly removed from their charges. He was present at a gathering at the cross of Douglas, Lanarkshire, where these activities were defended, and he provided a vindication of the position taken by the societies with regard to their refusal to adhere to the ministers who had taken the declarations of indulgence, whom they regarded as Erastian. Sheilds and the societies became champions of the cause of William of Orange, in support of whom the Cameronian regiment was raised to fight against James in the revolution of 1688. On 3 March 1689, along with Lining and Boyd, Sheilds took part in a renewal of the covenants at Borland Hill, Lanarkshire, of which he wrote 'The Renovation of the Covenant at Boreland' (1689). 
In 1690 Sheilds finally decided that he should become reconciled to the Church of Scotland: thus Sheilds, Lining, and Boyd presented two documents to the first general assembly under the Presbyterian settlement. The first consisted of a collection of grievances which the assembly refused to read publicly so as not 'to kindle contentions'. The second document set out terms of submission on the part of the societies' three ministers, marking their recognition that the reconstituted Church of Scotland was a true church and requesting that they be received into its fellowship. The submission was dated 22 October; it was accepted by the assembly three days later, when the assembly admonished Sheilds and his colleagues 'to walk orderly in time coming'. 
Sheilds received an appointment on 4 February 1691 to serve as chaplain to the Cameronian regiment raised in 1689 by James, earl of Angus. On the same day he was called to serve with Thomas Forrester in the parish of St Andrews, though he was not admitted to this charge until 15 September 1697. This was Sheilds only charge to a parish ministry, and he remained there for just under two years before a commission of the general assembly authorized him to accompany three other ministers and a group of colonists to the Darien (or New Caledonia) Colony in Central America 'to labour among the heathen'. Sailing from Rothesay on 24 September the company, including Sheilds and his brother Michael, reached Darien on 30 November, but not before no less than 160 of their number had died at sea. In a letter to the moderator of the commission of the general assembly Sheilds reported that 'one hundred and thirty are sick on shore and forty or fifty are dead already'. The colonists 'do scandalise the natives', Sheilds continued, 'by stealing from them and by teaching them both to swear and drink'. The only people about whom Sheilds was able to report positively were the indigenous people themselves, whose hospitality and kindness particularly impressed him (Barr, 243). Sheilds's work as a missionary was cut short when, after only a few inland expeditions, he travelled to Jamaica with Francis Borland and there contracted a fever. He died on 14 June 1700 in the home of Isabel Murray, a fellow Scot, at Port Royal, Jamaica. By the time of his death at the age of forty, 'much lamented by all those who knew his worth and parts' ('Fasti Scot.', 1.400), Sheilds had given up on the mission and was determined to return to Britain. 
Among his other books to be published after his death were 'Church Communion Enquired Into' (1706) and the autobiographical tract 'True and Faithful Relation of the Sufferings of Alexander Shields' (1715). 


@@@@@


doc= 25303


Sheldon, Edward (1599-1687), translator, was born on 23 April 1599 at Beoley, Worcestershire, the third of the six children of Edward Sheldon ('bap'. 1566, died 1643) and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1565-1630), daughter of Thomas Markham of Ollerton, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Mary Griffin. He became a gentleman commoner at Gloucester Hall, Oxford, about 1613, and was admitted to Gray's Inn, London, on 1 March 1620. He then returned to Oxford, matriculating as a member of University College on 19 November 1621. After travelling on the continent for several years, he returned to the family house at Stratton, near Cirencester, 'which at length he lost, or was forced to quit, for the cause of king Charles I and for his religion' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.206: 1). An Edward Sheldon was one of the garrison of Worcester when it surrendered in July 1646 after attempting to hold the city for Charles. 
Sheldon's translations provide evidence of his committed Catholicism. His first published work was 'The Holy Life of Monsr. Renty' (1658), which Wood describes as having been 'mangled by an Irish priest when it went to press' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.206: 2). He went on to publish 'The Rule of Catholick Faith' (1660), an English version of Francois Veron's 'Regle generale de la foy catholique', and two later translations from French, 'Christian Thoughts for every Day in the Month' and 'Counsels of Wisdom', were both published in London in 1680. Of these, his translation of Veron's work, later described as 'one of the most hazardous and difficult [tasks] a mere layman could have undertaken' ('Catholic Miscellany'), appears to have been most controversial; although it too was printed in London, in 1660, its title-page claims publication in Paris. 
Sheldon married Mary, daughter of Lionel Wake, a merchant of Antwerp and of Pedington, Northamptonshire. His Catholic and royalist connections remained strong. Of their fifteen children, Bridget and Teresa became nuns, and another daughter, Mary, married the royalist Sir Samuel Tuke. Both Dominic Sheldon and Ralph (died 1723) served James II, while Lionel (died 1678) was a Benedictine monk and chaplain to James's first wife, Anne. Ralph, his wife Elizabeth, and his brother Edward were among the Catholics who paid for the keep of Archbishop Plunket when he was imprisoned in London, and witnessed the removal of Plunket's head and arms as relics after his execution. Two other daughters, Frances and Katharine, were maids of honour and dressers to Charles II's wife, Catherine, to whom Sheldon dedicated his 'Counsels of Wisdom', 'Being desirous in these distracted times to offer something that is serious, and may invite People and direct them to the way of Virtue' (1680, sig. A2'r'). One of the copies in the Bodleian Library was given to Anthony Wood by Frances Sheldon. Sheldon died at his house in St James's Street, Westminster, on 27 March 1687, and was buried under the chapel at Somerset House. 


@@@@@


doc= 25304


Sheldon, Gilbert (1598-1677), archbishop of Canterbury, was born, according to the autograph notes in his bible, on the morning of 19 June 1598 and baptized on 22 June at Stanton, Staffordshire. He was the youngest son of Roger Sheldon (died 1635), member of an ancient and well-to-do family and bailiff to Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury, for whom he had 'speciall imployments and trusts'. The earl stood as godfather to Gilbert Sheldon, who was named after him; the other godfather was Robert Sanderson, father of the future bishop of the same name. 
Sheldon matriculated at Oxford on 1 July 1614, graduated BA from Trinity College on 27 November 1617, was incorporated at Cambridge in 1619, and proceeded MA on 28 June 1620. In November 1621 he was elected a probationer of All Souls and admitted as a fellow on 14 January 1623. On 23 May 1624 he was made deacon by the bishop of Oxford at Dorchester and was presumably ordained priest then or shortly afterwards. In the mid-1620s Sheldon became domestic chaplain to the lord keeper, Coventry, and served him as an examining chaplain. Charles I intended Sheldon to be master of the Savoy and dean of Westminster 'that he might better attend on his royal person' (Beddard, 'Memoir', 45). On 11 November 1628 Sheldon gained the degree of BD. This may well have been the occasion when he rattled the academic and theological dovecotes by denying that the pope was Antichrist: he was the first, according to the memory of Thomas Barlow, to voice this shocking denial of a fundamental axiom of the Calvinist establishment. 
Sheldon's university career flourished. He was a sympathizer with and possibly a protege of Archbishop William Laud, chancellor of the university. On 25 June 1634 he completed the academic exercises for the degree of DD by arguing against the propositions that the pope had the power to depose Christian princes and that clerics are exempted by God's law from obedience to secular rulers and by asserting that it was permissible to oblige Roman Catholics in England to swear allegiance. In March 1635 Sheldon was elected warden of All Souls. He served the university in various roles: in 1634 and 1640 he was pro-vice-chancellor; in 1638 he took part in the visitation of Merton College. Sheldon, perhaps characteristically, was stern in his denunciation of the warden, Nathanael Brent: 'if I were conscious of such carelessness of the main affairs of this college, or of such practising upon the company, for the wasting of the common stock and my own advantage, I should not have the face to endure a visitation, but should lay the key under the door and be gone. (Trevor-Roper, 356)' As was usual in the seventeenth century Sheldon's rise within the university also brought with it preferment within the church: on 26 February 1632 he was installed as prebendary of Gloucester; in 1633 he became vicar of Hackney; in 1636 rector of Oddington, Oxfordshire, and Ickford, Buckinghamshire, and a royal chaplain; and in 1639 he became rector of Newington, Oxfordshire. 
Accounts of Sheldon's early career have been coloured by Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon's nostalgic memoir of the high-minded gatherings at Lord Falkland's country house at Great Tew in Oxfordshire. Sheldon, along with other luminaries of the University of Oxford and the wider world of politics and learning, attended and impressed his host, Hyde, and several others with his learning, gravity, and prudence. Clarendon's hindsight undoubtedly invested these social occasions with more significance than they originally possessed, indeed Tew stood as a symbol of what had been lost by civil wars and puritan revolution, but connections and friendships were established by Sheldon in these years which were to be sustained for decades. The close friendship which he established with Richard Newdigate of Arbury lasted for half a century: from Oxford, Sheldon kept the Newdigate family in touch with literary fashions, political news, and the most recent sermons; he visited them, lobbied on their behalf, and prayed by their bedsides. 
When the regime of Charles I began to unravel in 1640 Sheldon was four-square behind his monarch and encouraged his friend Hyde's efforts to rally support for so-called constitutional royalism. Like several other heads of colleges Sheldon took the protestation oath of 1642 only with qualifications, which emphasized his obedience to royal authority. During the civil war Sheldon waited on Charles I at Oxford and elsewhere. About 1646 he was appointed clerk of the closet. He seems to have been trusted as a political as well as a spiritual adviser for he certainly participated in various peace negotiations. In February 1644 Sheldon took part in the talks for the treaty of Uxbridge but his strenuous arguments in defence of the Church of England may have alienated the other parties to the negotiations. 
Sheldon's role did not diminish after the defeat of the royalists. In June 1647 Charles asked Sir Thomas Fairfax for his chaplains Sheldon and Henry Hammond and, despite the protests of MPs, the request was granted. Sheldon appears to have been with Charles at Hatfield and Newmarket in the summer of 1647. That summer he took extensive soundings from leading Anglican clergy such as Bishop Robert Skinner, Bishop Thomas Morton, and Archbishop James Ussher about the possibility of a religious toleration as the basis of a potential treaty between the king and his adversaries. In 1648 Charles once again sought the presence of Sheldon and Hammond, but although parliament acceded the two chaplains did not reach the Isle of Wight because they were under detention at Oxford. 
During the war years Sheldon had remained active in university life at Oxford. There are glimpses of him pursuing the duties of a royal chaplain; lodging his friend Hyde in All Souls; seeking the signatures of academics to the royalist loyalty oath imposed in April 1645; and urging the university's rights in the negotiations for the surrender of Oxford in 1646. He took a leading part in the university's resistance to the parliamentary visitation of 1647, but to no avail. He was officially ejected from the wardenship of All Souls by the visitors on 30 March 1648 and when he refused to surrender his lodgings they ordered his forcible removal and detention. So many well-wishers visited him in prison that the authorities tried unsuccessfully to move him and Hammond to Wallingford Castle. It is unclear how long Sheldon remained incarcerated. A. G. Matthews claimed that entries in the parish register at Ickford indicated that Sheldon was there between 7 May 1648 and 27 December 1650 -- although he had been ejected from the benefice by November 1646. Other sources claim that Sheldon was released from prison or, more likely, house arrest in Oxford at the end of 1648 on condition that he did not go within 5 miles of Oxford or of the king's gaol in the Isle of Wight. A draft letter of 15 January 1649 survives, in which he describes himself as having been 'a stranger to the world for these nine months' but 'I now conceive myself as good as at liberty & intend about a week hence to make my first journye to our friends in the forrest' (Pocock, 15.182). Whether the 'forrest' was a real location or a metaphor for the refuge of a royalist in the darkest days of the Stuart cause is not clear. Sheldon was 'unresolved' about whether to join the royalist exiles on the continent. In the event he retired to the midlands, basing himself variously in Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, and Staffordshire. He spent long periods at Sir Robert Shirley's house at Staunton Harold, with his Okeover relatives at East Bridgford, Nottinghamshire, at his brother's house in Stanton, and visited the Pakingtons, Coventrys, and Yelvertons. Although he is recorded at Petersham Lodge in autumn 1658 Sheldon rarely ventured south despite the fact that many Anglican clergy lived unmolested in London throughout the 1650s. 
Sheldon's role in royalist and Anglican circles during the 1650s can be reconstructed in outline from his remarkable incoming correspondence, most of which seems to have been addressed to him care of his nephew Joseph Sheldon at the house of Mr Price, a woollen draper, at the Gold Key in St Paul's Churchyard. Although some of Sheldon's own letters survived and were later printed by Barwick, it is the letters to him from Hammond, Bishop Matthew Wren, Bishop Brian Duppa, Dr Robert Payne, and Dr John Barwick that reveal him as a trusted intermediary in the royalist cause and a man of wide and discriminating intellectual interests. 
In 1649 Hyde had assured Sheldon that 'you are one of those few by whose advice and example I shall most absolutely guide myself, and upon whose friendship I have an entire and absolute dependence' (Bosher, 55). Nor was this mere formal compliment, for Hyde clearly used Sheldon as a channel for communicating with the remnants of the Church of England's leadership. In October 1651 Hammond wrote to Bishop Wren, the most senior of the bishops, who was imprisoned in the Tower, that Sheldon had urged him to exhort the surviving bishops 'to think of doing somewhat to preserve a church amongst us, lest it perish with their order' (Pocock, 9.294). The continuation of the ministry by further consecrations to the episcopate and by episcopal ordination of ministers was an urgent problem for the Church of England. The other was the dilemma over whether to use the proscribed 'Book of Common Prayer' or to find some way of compromising over the liturgy. Sheldon's own view of the resulting schism and confusion was dramatically expressed in a letter of January 1653: 'Amongst those that either are, or would be thought loyal subjects to the King and obedient sons of this Church, there is great diversity of opinion and practice about Prayer and the public worship of God; some believing themselves excused by the times, if they wholly omit it, some contriving the substance of it into a prayer of their own making: supposing they have done their duty, if they pray nothing against the old form; other retain part, some more, some less, according to their several judgment; and some again holding themselves obliged to use all, according to their former engagements; and not so much as to communicate with any that use it not (supposing them schismatical). (Barwick, 537)' The solutions which Sheldon seems to have proposed in schemes which John Barwick laid before Wren are revealing. Sheldon wanted the bishops to make a ruling which their scattered and harassed clergy could then follow. He seems to have contemplated a relaxation of the rule of absolute conformity to the prayer book with resignation if not equanimity. He argued that the bishops had authority to do this since they were reduced to the 'primitive' state of the early church 'under a civil authority, though not pagan, yet clearly antichristian, and such as endeavour to destroy the Church of God'. If they demurred the exiled king could be approached for a commission by which no more than three of the bishops could dispense with or temper 'the old laws' (ibid., 541). 
In May 1654 a meeting of the leading Anglican bishops and clergy was called at Richmond, home of Bishop Duppa, to address these issues and in particular to stiffen the backbones of some of the Anglican clergy who seemed to be weakening -- both Jeremy Taylor and Robert Sanderson were thought to be in danger of complying with the authorities to some degree. Judging by their letters Hammond, Duppa, and others regarded Sheldon as vital to this effort, yet he did not attend, the meeting fizzled out, and there were no more concerted attempts by the Anglican clergy to perpetuate their episcopate. Sheldon still remained prominent in Anglican circles in the later 1650s, when the churchmen were harassed in several ways: 'and yet we go on' as Taylor wrote to Sheldon in December 1657, 'and shall till we can go on no longer' (Bosher, 43). In May 1659 when Hyde once again mooted the idea that new bishops be consecrated in England, Sheldon's name was prominent on the list of his preferred candidates. 
Sheldon's correspondence of the 1650s attests to the bookish interests of Sheldon and his circle during their enforced leisure. The virtuoso Robert Payne, ejected canon of Christ Church and an early admirer of Thomas Hobbes, wrote to Sheldon with news and snippets from the works of Hobbes, Gassendi, and Athanasius Kircher. Sheldon asked George Morley to send him Catholic books of devotion from Antwerp. Hammond expected Sheldon's advice on his own writings: he asked for his views on Grotius's annotations of the scriptures, the Ignatian epistles and other patristic matters, but he also wanted to know whether Sheldon thought the time right to reply to the presbyterian critics of episcopacy. Sheldon was thought to have better political antennae and greater influence than most of his brethren, and he was encouraged to think so himself, as Hyde wrote to him in October 1659, 'when you meet, as meet you will, I think you will be satisfied with [the King], and nobody is like to do so much good upon him as you are, for sure he reverences nobody more' (Bosher, 136). 
The restoration of the monarchy was the work of presbyterian politicians and clergy. At first Anglicans like Sheldon could only watch and wait. Throughout the winter of 1659-60 the leaders of the Church of England began to gather in London: on 27 April 1660 Sheldon arrived in the capital and met Morley, the envoy of the exiled court; on 4 May a meeting of the clerical leaders, including Duppa, Wren, John Warner, Morley, and Barwick, took place and Sheldon was almost certainly also present. Charles Stuart landed at Dover on 25 May to be greeted by the presbyterians. At Canterbury the following evening he had a private meeting with Sheldon. Now that Charles and Hyde were back in England they responded to the realities on the ground and to circumstances rather than following a premeditated plan. Several interests and parties had to be placated and Sheldon and his brethren were only one group among many. Hyde, ennobled as earl of Clarendon, ensured that responsibilities and honours were spread widely. In mid-June Sheldon, John Earle, and Morley were entrusted with deciding on some of the many petitions for presentations to crown benefices. Sheldon became dean of the Chapel Royal and when he was called upon to preach before the king at Whitehall on 28 June 1660, a day set aside for thanksgiving for the return of the monarchy, he trod carefully so as not to alienate presbyterian and puritan feeling. In his sermon, published as 'Davids Deliverance and Thanksgiving' (1660), he acknowledged 'the Registers of his Providence', and lamented the debauchery, the impiety, the ingratitude which reigned still among the impudent English -- a safely uncontentious blanket charge (p. 13). In August 1660 Bishop Brian Duppa wrote to Sheldon: 'you are the only person about his majesty that I have confidence in and I persuade myself that as none hath his ear more, so none is likely to prevail on his heart more, and there was never more need of it' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 40, fol. 17). Others like William Nicholson wrote in equally flattering style of Sheldon's proximity to power. But there is a question mark over Sheldon's real influence on the king or political decision making. He certainly reaped the rewards of his loyal service: on 21 September 1660 he was nominated to the bishopric of London in succession to William Juxon. On 9 October he was elected; this was confirmed on 23 October and on 28 October he was consecrated alongside Morley, Humphrey Henchman, George Griffith, and Sanderson in Henry VII's chapel at Westminster Abbey by Bishops Duppa, Accepted Frewen, Wren, Warner, and Henry King. John Sudbury's sermon was an unabashed paean to episcopacy. The service was followed by a feast at Haberdashers' Hall. There were, however, several individuals among the first round of appointments to the episcopate who would never have been nominated by Sheldon. Indeed he actually disapproved of some of the candidates, such as John Gauden. 
Sheldon's influence at court is difficult to gauge. He quickly acquired the reputation of an 'eminence grise'. He had been appointed master of the Savoy, where the 1661 Savoy Conference of 1661 between presbyterians and episcopalians was held, and although he rarely attended sessions it was widely believed that he knew more of the king's mind than any other. Whatever his personal sway Sheldon appreciated the need for political organization. In April 1661 he was a moving force behind the election of clerical representatives to convocation in an attempt to outflank the presbyterian party. When two presbyterians, Richard Baxter and Edmund Calamy, were elected by the London clergy Bishop Sheldon found a loophole which allowed him to 'excuse' them from service. After the failure of the Savoy conference, convocation devoted itself to revising the 'Book of Common Prayer' so that it could be attached to an act of uniformity which was under consideration in parliament. 
The Cavalier Parliament, which met in 1661, was of paramount importance to the future of the Church of England, and Sheldon proved to be a consummate parliamentary politician. He had to be, for two reasons. The first was that Charles and Clarendon contemplated a far more conciliatory and permissive religious settlement than suited Sheldon's view of the Church of England. Parliament, therefore, would have to be used as a lever on royal policy. The second reason was that contrary to widespread assumptions this assembly was not overwhelmingly Anglican, nor full of reactionary gentry determined to stamp out puritanism and drive every subject into the national church. It needed leadership and management if it was to protect the Church of England. Although sparsely documented Sheldon's role is apparent after November 1661 when the bishops had returned to the House of Lords and Sheldon kept up a steady pressure on his brethren to attend in person, to vote in the interests of the king and the church, and to send him their proxies. Sheldon's relations with the small group of MPs who were his allies in the Commons were less formal. Men such as Sir Job Charleton, Sir John Bramston, Sir Heneage Finch, Sir Thomas Fanshaw, Sir John Berkenhead, Sir Thomas Meres, Sir Henry Yelverton, and John Vaughan were committed to the Church of England and naturally deferred to its primate. These MPs were the workhorses behind the religious and ecclesiastical legislation of the period. They gave the lead which their back-bench colleagues would follow. And they took their cue from Sheldon. 
In politics Sheldon was adroit, pragmatic, and flexible, but he had his limits. For example, in February 1662 Sheldon and other bishops allowed themselves to be persuaded by Clarendon to wreck a Commons measure which would turf presbyterian incumbents out of their livings. Why would Sheldon assist Clarendon to keep presbyterians within the church? He probably preferred another strategy to oust them. The failed measure was transferred to the 'Uniformity Bill' which his allies in the Commons had produced. On 19 May 1662 Charles II gave his assent to the 'Act of Uniformity' which brought together the revised prayer book, the clauses requiring presbyterian incumbents to accept episcopal ordination or leave their livings, and the other stipulations of total liturgical conformity and obedience to episcopal authority. But Sheldon's work was not at an end. There were real threats to the act. Nervous of its consequences Clarendon proposed its postponement or moderation. Sheldon took a stand and told the privy council that to suspend a law 'would not only render the parliament cheap, and have influence upon all other laws, but in truth let in a visible confusion upon Church and State' (Seaward, 'Cavalier Parliament', 180). He wrote angrily to Clarendon complaining of this 'great unkindness' in exposing him to the hatred of parliament or of 'that malicious party in whose jaws I must live' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 77, fol. 319), and he took care that his views were known: Sir John Berkenhead's 'Mercurius Publicus' published an account with the same phraseology as Sheldon's letter; and Yelverton wrote to friends of how 'the prudence and wisdom of my Lord of London' had foiled the presbyterians (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. C 210, fol. 78). 
Sheldon's elevation to the archbishopric of Canterbury on the death of Juxon was a foregone conclusion. He had already been effectively deputizing for the frail and elderly archbishop, performing his role at Charles II's coronation, and receiving a commission in November 1661 to consecrate the new Scottish bishops. On 6 June 1663 the 'conge d'elire' was issued for Sheldon's election as archbishop, the dean and chapter duly elected him on 11 August, and he was installed on 31 August. 
Sheldon's government of the Church of England was concerned with uniformity, reform, and above all defence. He would contemplate no relaxation of uniformity to aid dissenters: as he told Ormond in 1663, 'Tis only a resolute execution of the law that might cure this disease -- all other remedies have and will increase it -- and 'tis necessary that they who will not be governed as men by reason and persuasion, should be governed as beasts by power of force; all other courses will be ineffectual, ever hath been so, ever will be. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 45, fol. 151)' He recognized that nonconformity drew strength from the partial conformity of some supposedly Anglican ministers, men like Mr Hart of Peterborough diocese who would not read the prayer book, wear the surplice, or respect the holy days, and who is 'rich & stubborne, & therefore the fitter to be made an Example' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. 308, fol. 76). If uniformity was to succeed it would require reform and greater discipline within the church. Reform was a priority. As he told William Sancroft in 1662 when arranging to bring him south from Durham, 'the moulding of new statutes for Cathedralls and some Colledges (when we have leasure for it) is like to be part of your burden when you come among us; my declining age stands in need of such assistants, and when I shall be able to put those that are best able to serve the church in the readyest way to do it I shall sing a Nunc Dimittis. (BL, Harley MS 3784, fol. 77)' Plans were indeed drafted. Clerical incomes, pluralism, and standards, all needed attention: Sheldon's 'Orders Concerning Ordinations' (1665) wanted to exclude those who were 'to the Scandall of the Church and the dissatisfaction of good men' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. C 308, fol. 30). The church courts were another bugbear. The archbishop warned Sir Giles Sweit, dean of the arches, in March 1668, 'great clamours... are made against the ecclesiastical courts for delays of justice and other abuses'. He instructed Sweit to draw up reforms, 'nor can you be ignorant what a shock the church is at this time likely to undergo upon that account, if you mend not your ways' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. C 308, fol. 114). Good in itself, reform was also a defence of the church. 
Sheldon defended the church against its main enemies by any means. He asserted its legal rights: conferring in 1671 with Dean Thomas Turner of Canterbury on the privileges enjoyed by that cathedral so as to strengthen the hand of the dean of Gloucester in a jurisdictional struggle with the mayor and corporation. He tacked the nonconformist problem with hard facts and blatant propaganda. In 1663 he instigated a survey of the distribution of dissenters in his diocese; in 1665 he sent out a questionnaire to all the bishops asking 'where and how and in what profession of life' the ejected ministers lived, and how they behaved 'in relation to the peace and quiet as well of the Church as of the State'. Simultaneously Lambeth Palace seems to have been behind a series of virulent and nakedly political tracts on the dangers of religious pluralism by clerical authors such as Thomas Tomkins, Samuel Parker, and George Stradling, many of them Sheldon's chaplains, which played on lay anxiety. The purpose of both the fact gathering and the pamphleteering was to smooth the way for the anti-dissenter legislation such as the 'Conventicle and Five Mile Acts' which Sheldon's allies were promoting in the Commons. 
Sheldon bound the fortunes of the church to parliament. In 1664 he surrendered the clergy's right to tax themselves in convocation in return for their right to vote in parliamentary elections. Convocation ceased to conduct business and atrophied. But the 1660s saw a steady stream of statutes designed to buttress the church and suppress its protestant rivals. Legislation needs, however, to be enforced. This was the weakest point in Sheldon's position. Neither the government not the local JPs were to be relied upon. In August 1669, for instance, Sheldon complained of the neglect of those who should assist the church by enforcing religious uniformity 'so that unless the Parliament when they meet will give us better remedies, we must (I think) yield up the cudgels' (BL, Harley MS 7377, fol. 4'v'). Yet such were the vacillations of royal policy that by May 1670 Sheldon found himself writing to every bishop with news of the new 'Conventicle Act'. He urged them to ensure that it was widely publicized, especially in peculiar jurisdictions, to admonish their clergy to persuade nonconformists and to maintain exemplary lives and strict conformity to the prayer book. The Commons, Sheldon believed, were at the mercy of courtiers' machinations, 'for all the disorders have arisen from the King's family and servants' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 45, fol. 212). 
The personnel and mores of Charles II's court were antipathetic to Sheldon. Even worse the reputation of the archbishop and the church suffered by association with the court. Already unpopular in many quarters for their pretensions and their persecution of protestant dissenters the bishops were subject to scurrilous rumours. Pepys heard that Sheldon 'doth keep a wench' and Andrew Marvell's 'Last Instructions to a Painter' alleged that he had several mistresses. At Easter 1668 a mob vented its grievances about the sexual licence of the court and religious persecution by attacking London's brothels: the supposed sexual peccadilloes of the archbishop figured prominently in the accompanying satires and rhetoric. In fact Sheldon was probably already out of royal favour as a consequence of Clarendon's fall from power in 1667. The earl of Lauderdale told Gilbert Burnet that when the king summoned Sheldon to tell him of Clarendon's dismissal the archbishop made no reply and, when pressed by the king, said 'Sir, I wish you would put away this woman that you keep' ('Burnet's History', 1.453). The inference that Sheldon blamed Lady Castlemaine for Clarendon's fall is not borne out by Sheldon's private correspondence. Sheldon believed that the lord chancellor had long courted his own ruin 'since he that despiseth counsell must perish'. When the storm broke over Clarendon, Sheldon told the duke of Ormond plainly that 'God knows for these divers yeares I have had litle reason to be fond of him... I am sure we owe the confusion we are in to his ill management of our affayres, and of himself' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 45, fols. 222, 232). In the coffee houses Sheldon was praised as 'a mighty stout man, and a man of a brave high spirit and cares not for this disfavour he is under at Court' (Pepys, 'Diary', 8.593). But it is likely that he felt the loss of influence keenly. He told one suitor for preferment in July 1670 that his 'advice is seldom asked of late in any promotions' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 44, fol. 215). 
The 1672 declaration of indulgence was the nadir of Sheldon's archiepiscopate and church. Even after Charles's climb-down in 1673 confusion reigned about royal policy and the legal position of conventicles; but Sheldon resolutely told his diocesans that 'His Majestie's sence is no otherwise knowne than by his publique laws, and by them, therefore, wee are only to be guided in our dutyes' (BL, Harley MS 7377, fol. 55'v'). The elderly archbishop was increasingly sidelined. In 1674-5 the earl of Danby attempted to revive the 'Cavalier and Church' party and the bishops held meetings at Lambeth, but Sheldon did not figure in them and Bishop Morley seems to have provided the leadership. Meanwhile younger men, many of them promoted by Sheldon, such as Sancroft, John Dolben (who was married to Sheldon's niece), and Henry Compton, were coming to the fore. It was Compton, for example, who organized the most comprehensive national survey yet of religious affiliation in 1676. In December 1676 Sheldon was ageing and ailing, complaining of cataracts in both eyes. 
At the Restoration Sheldon's connections were renewed with Oxford. He was reinstated as warden of All Souls on the death of the interloper, but was never installed in office. Sheldon was involved from an early stage in the plans to build a university theatre -- Christopher Wren displayed a model to the Royal Society in 1663 -- to complete Laud's scheme of relocating all the university's secular ceremonies away from the sacred space of St Mary's, the university church. Sheldon's initial gift of $1000 in 1664 was acknowledged by the university as worthy of 'that victim of piety, your noble predecessor' Laud ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 161), but it did not stimulate other benefactions and by September 1665 Sheldon undertook to fund the whole project. By the time the theatre had been built and equipped Sheldon had spent $12,239 and invested another $2000 to provide a maintenance fund. When Clarendon resigned as chancellor of the university, Dean John Fell of Christ Church secured the election of Sheldon as his successor. But Sheldon was unwilling to take up the position in the light of his other duties and perhaps of his lack of royal favour. He reigned in name only until he could resign in July 1669 in favour of the staunch Anglican James Butler, duke of Ormond. 
The Sheldonian was the most public of Sheldon's many charitable benefactions. Sheldon's secretary, Miles Smyth, believed that he had spent $38,000 on good and charitable causes in the 1660s alone. This included the purchase of a City residence for the bishop of London, repairs to the palaces at Croydon, Fulham, and Lambeth (where he built 'the fayre librarie'), contributions to the rebuilding of St Paul's, sums to Trinity College, Oxford, and Trinity College, Cambridge, payments to the redemption of captives out of Algiers, payments to the king, and abatements of fines to tenants and purchasers of archiepiscopal lands. 
In his will Sheldon described himself as 'holding fast the true orthodox profession of the catholique faith of Christ... being a true member of His catholique church within the communion of a living part thereof, the present church of England' ('DNB'). An awareness of the catholicity of the church was an important aspect of Sheldon's outlook. It informed his views of the Roman Catholic church. As a young man Sheldon had been one of the first to break with the orthodoxy that the pope was the Antichrist. According to Burnet, Sheldon told the duke of York that it was not the doctrine of the Church of England that Roman Catholics were idolators. Another anecdote has it that when Anne Hyde, duchess of York, converted to Rome, Sheldon told her that he regretted the Church of England's abandonment of confession and prayer for the dead. Such attitudes may stem from his association with Laud in the 1630s and after the Restoration he was a defender of the Laudian heritage and mythology: he arranged for the publication of Laud's prayers as 'A Summarie of Devotions' (Oxford, 1667); and after rescuing Laud's papers from the clutches of William Prynne he asked William Sancroft to prepare Laud's diary and the history of his trial for the press. However, Sheldon's only publication, the sermon of 28 June 1660, was utterly conventional in its denunciation of the nation's crying sins and its uncompromising assertion that 'gratitude [for divine mercies] is not the business of a day or a year, but of our whole life' (p. 49). Manuscript notes of sermons probably preached in the 1620s are also unexceptional in their appeal to reason and faith, and their assertion of the fundamentally miraculous events such as the resurrection at the heart of Christian faith. In terms of the great early seventeenth-century theological wars, Sheldon was no doubt an Arminian. But speculative theology was no longer the explosive issue it had once been. When Sheldon recommended Arminians like William Creed and Richard Allestree to the regius chair of divinity at Oxford he was doing as much to promote royalists and 'sufferers' as he was to balance the theological influence of Calvinist figures like Thomas Barlow, the Lady Margaret professor. 
A liturgical and devotional conservative, a catholic with less hatred of popery than most, and an Arminian, Sheldon can still appear a tepid kind of Christian. His enemies and some of his friends were less than complimentary about his piety. Gilbert Burnet described Sheldon as seeming 'not to have a deep sense of religion, if any at all' and talking of religion 'most commonly as of an engine of government and a matter of policy'. Even his one-time chaplain, Samuel Parker, remarked that 'though he was very assiduous at prayers, yet he did not set so great a value on them as others did, nor regard so much worship as the use of worship, placing the chief point of religion in the practice of a good life' ('DNB'). 
What seemed to ignite Sheldon's zeal was the safety of the church. He is said to have told the Cambridge Platonist Henry More that he was well disposed towards the new philosophy provided 'that the faith, the peace, and the institutions of the Church were not thereby menaced' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 423). Sheldon's was an authoritarian mentality and he put a premium on the discipline of the church. He preferred team players and could be harsh in his judgements on those like Barlow or Bishop John Wilkins who failed to abide by what he took to be the rules of the game. Even those whom posterity has sanctified were not beyond Sheldon's reproach. On news of Jeremy Taylor's death Sheldon was brutally frank: 'I am glad he left no more trouble behind him, he was of a dangerous temper apt to break out into extravagancies, and I have had, till of late years, much to do with him to keep him in order, and to find diversions for him -- now those fears are at an end. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 45, fol. 222)' Sheldon died at Lambeth Palace on 9 November 1677 and was privately buried on the south side of Croydon church near the tomb of Archbishop Whitgift 'according to his own special direction' on 16 November. His nephew and executor Sir Joseph Sheldon erected a monument to his memory in Croydon church. The white marble effigy of the archbishop with mitre and crozier was the work of Jasper Latham and bore a Latin inscription by Bishop John Dolben. Sheldon left $1500 in charitable legacies to All Souls, Canterbury Cathedral, the hospital of Herbaldown, Kent, and to indigent persons. The rest of his personal estate went to the five children of his older brother Ralph. 
Sheldon played an important role in maintaining the identity and morale of the Church of England during the 1640s and 1650s. He took a central part in the manoeuvres which led to the restoration of the church with almost all of its rights and powers in 1662, and bears much of the responsibility for the penal laws of the 1660s. However, none of his efforts towards religious uniformity, ecclesiastical reform, or the defence of the church were marked with conspicuous success. The Church of England's pretensions to be the exclusive national church were never sustainable after the 1640s. Much of the undoubted support that the restored church enjoyed among the population was thanks to a younger generation of preachers and devotional writers or to the theologians among Sheldon's contemporaries. Nevertheless it was Sheldon's presence at the helm of the Church of England that ensured that it survived in its essentially sixteenth-century form into the later seventeenth century and beyond. 


@@@@@


doc= 25305


Sheldon, John (1752-1808), anatomist and surgeon, was born at his father's house in Tottenham Court Road, London, on 6 July 1752, the eldest son of John Sheldon, surgeon apothecary, formerly in the Royal Navy. He had a younger brother, Thomas, and two sisters, Mary Elizabeth and Anna Maria. Educated at Harrow School, where he was flogged for 'making a boat and floating it', he was then apprenticed to Henry Watson, professor of anatomy at the Company of Surgeons, whose school at Rathbone Place, London, was later wrecked by a mob. Sheldon trained also at the Westminster and the Lock hospitals. On William Hewson's death in 1774 he succeeded him as resident pupil to John Hunter, attending William Hunter's school of anatomy in Great Windmill Street. Sheldon's interest in embalming profited from the knowledge gained from both teachers. After receiving his diploma in 1775 from the Company of Surgeons he was appointed to the Lock Hospital, where he had been a pupil, continuing lecturing and research. There he was able to use his embalming skills in a case for which he became notorious. Sheldon had as a patient a young woman, dying of phthisis, to whom, he said, he became deeply attached. Acceding to her request for her body to be preserved after death and kept beside him, he removed it, embalmed and injected, to his own house, where it was displayed in a glass-topped cabinet. Later it was described with enthusiasm by Faujas-de-St-Fond. Twenty years later Sheldon's widow presented the mummy to the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons. Appointed lecturer in anatomy at William Hunter's school in 1776, Sheldon's success prompted him to open his own school in Great Queen Street, London, in 1777. Though still only twenty-five years of age, with William Hewson and Magnus Falconar now deceased he was the only outstanding teacher of his generation. He was appointed surgeon to the General Medical Asylum in Welbeck Street, and on 18 July 1783 succeeded William Hunter as professor of anatomy at the Royal Academy, earning, it is said, great respect. It is related how, having dissected a horse, he had casts made of it for the use of the students. 
In 1779 Sheldon founded the Great Queen Street Medical Society, becoming its first president. At one time it had 150 members and issued diplomas. One rule required the president to 'wear his hat while in the chair'. On 29 April 1784 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and on 20 April 1786 a member of the Royal Society of Medicine of Paris. 
In 1781 Sheldon edited a catalogue of Petrus Camper's works, 'Historiae literariae cultoribus'; the following year he edited four dissertations by J. N. Lieberkuehn, published in London. Sheldon's chief work, 'The History of the Absorbent System, Part the First', was published in 1784. In it he paid generous tribute to William Hewson, and to John Hunter, who had ingested madder to prove the pigment was absorbed and carried by the lymphatics. He described meticulously his own methods of injection and preservation, his cannula tip bevelled, as in a modern instrument, to facilitate penetration of the vessels. Antonio Scarpa, professor of anatomy at Pavia, was so impressed by his work that he prepared two illustrations for the book. Sheldon was widely praised because he made no secret of his methods. It was in fact a most learned treatise that corrected many errors of earlier writers on the subject. 
Sheldon now became much involved with early efforts at ballooning, making calculations about the gravity of the atmosphere and investigating materials for construction. An attempt at making a balloon failed in 1784, but on 16 October that year Sheldon made his first ascent with J. P. Blanchard, who had already had several successes. Although the balloon travelled as far as Sunbury, where Sheldon alighted, a violent altercation had developed between them, and Blanchard proceeded alone to Romsey. About 1784 Sheldon married Rebecca (died 1820), second daughter of the Revd William Palmer, vicar of Combe Raleigh in Devon; they had no children. 
Sheldon was elected surgeon to Westminster Hospital on 20 April 1786. At the time he had become interested in studying the anatomy of whales. He devised a poisoned harpoon for this purpose, and in 1788 set out for Greenland. On the voyage he is said to have had an attack of brain fever and had to be transferred to a returning ship. He moved from London to Exeter in the same year, from then on subject to recurrent illness, probably a manic-depressive psychosis. His brother petitioned the queen for him to be allowed to continue the annual lectures at the Royal Academy, which he gave until his death. Sheldon's brother and sisters assisted in his nursing. His 'Essay on the Fracture of the Patella', already written, was published in 1789. During recovery, in 1796, he contributed 'An essay on the iris' to the volume 'Essays, by a Society of Gentlemen at Exeter'. 
In 1797 Sheldon was appointed a surgeon to the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital. Highly regarded by his colleagues, it was recognized that his intellect became 'clouded at intervals' (Harris, 84, and also mentioned by 'Farington Diary', ed. Greig, 6.182). He died on 8 October 1808 at his cottage in Exeter by the Exe, and was buried in Combe Raleigh churchyard. An obituary notice in the 'Monthly Mirror' spoke of him as 'humane, active in every intercourse of friendship and, though of so animated a character, mild, forbearing and affable... There was nothing like envy in his composition' (Dobson, 83). 


@@@@@


doc= 25306


Sheldon, Ralph (1623-1684), antiquary, was born on 1 August 1623 at Beoley, Worcestershire, the eldest son of William Sheldon (1589-1659) of Beoley and Weston in Long Compton, Warwickshire, and Elizabeth (1592-1656), daughter of William, second Lord Petre. He was a nephew of Edward Sheldon the translator. The Sheldons were one of the wealthiest gentry families in the region, but their access to public life was limited by their Catholicism. Sheldon left England for France and Italy in 1642, returning shortly before his marriage in 1647 to Lady Henrietta Maria, daughter of John Savage, second Earl Rivers ('c'.1603-1654). In the civil war the house at Beoley was apparently burnt to prevent it falling to the parliamentarian forces and the estate was sequestrated. Following the Restoration Sheldon was nominated as a member of the contemplated order of the Royal Oak for his family's devotion to the royalist cause. 
After his wife's death, childless, in 1663 Sheldon devoted himself to the study of genealogy, heraldry, and antiquities, drawing up a 'Catalogue of the nobility of England since the Norman Conquest' (CUL, Add. 8138). He created a fine library at Weston, catalogued by Anthony Wood; he also had a cabinet of curiosities. In 1667 he again travelled to Rome, where over three years he extended his collection. Described by Wood as 'a munificent favourer of learning and learned men' (Hamper, 434-5), he granted a pension to the antiquary John Vincent, from whom he purchased an important collection of manuscripts belonging to his father, the herald Augustine Vincent. On his own death he bequeathed this collection to the College of Arms. Despite his Catholicism, which led to his arrest in 1678, Sheldon was apparently popular locally and known as 'Great Sheldon' (Nash, 1.68). He died at Weston on 24 June 1684; 500 people viewed the body before its burial at the family chapel at Beoley. 


@@@@@


doc= 25307


Sheldon, Richard (1570?-1651?), Church of England convert and polemicist, was born in Wolverhampton, Staffordshire, almost certainly a relative of the Sheldons of Beoley, Worcestershire, and Weston, Warwickshire, and was raised a Roman Catholic. He became a student at the English College for training secular priests at Rheims, France, in January 1589, and was sent on to the English College at Rome, where he was admitted as a 'metaphysicus' in October 1590. He describes himself as well reputed in learning, and was ordained subdeacon, deacon, and priest in 1593, but his observations of the higher clergy in Rome, when he had become zealous and willing for martyrdom, apparently left him very critical. About 1595 he was sent via Genoa to Alicante in Spain. Accompanied by Robert Persons, he had access to Cardinal Cajetan and the Jesuit general, Acquaviva, and was at Valladolid by April 1596, presumably to study further at St Alban's College there. 
By November Sheldon had arrived in Flanders, and before the end of the year he began working in England, at least partly in Oxfordshire, moving, he states, in the best circles. He testifies to being zealous in exhorting and writing, and preaching diligently, on at least one occasion for an hour and a half. Even at this time he emphasized respect for civil authority and thus clashed with Jesuits. The Gunpowder Plot 'of the accursed Catesby' (Sheldon, 'Certain General Reasons', introduction) was a turning point for him, and was reinforced by the assassination of Henri IV of France in 1610. He felt vehemently that it was completely wrong to bring in the kingdom of God by subversion, and bitterly attacked the Jesuits for, in his view, advocating it. He surreptitiously attended Anglican services, and records how his views changed 'as God touched my heart'. Sung psalms and preaching immediately struck him by their simplicity and gravity, 'that I began to thinke... perhaps God is among them', but when he discovered that most of the liturgy 'was composed out of the infallible word of God... I resolved that the same must needs be good'. With the subsequent appreciation that 'the Preachers continually did inculcate... integritie of conscience, and holinesse of conversation with the necessitie of good works to salvation: I well and clearly perceived how the Church of England was calumniated by the Roman Doctors'. He was also very impressed by the integration of mind and tongue in the liturgy, 'with their pious sounds to beate the gates of heaven, and begge mercie at his hands onely: who with the Father and the holy Ghost I saw onely worshipped' (Sheldon, 'Motives', 135-6). 
Sheldon was at St Omer about the time of Henry Garnet's execution in 1606, perhaps because he was banished, but perhaps also because he was, as Benjamin Norton wrote to Geoffrey Pole, 'a broker for the Jesuites in getting monie for St O[mer], and rich Nunns for Bruxells' (Questier, 90-91). He returned to England, but was arrested and exiled in 1610, when he spent time in theological discussion at Louvain. As early as October that year, according to Norton, he may have taken the oath of allegiance to James I, but when he again arrived in England in April 1611 he was immediately captured, probably under the name Gervaise Sheldon. He was imprisoned in Newgate, one of the London gaols for people likely to be executed, and there he again reportedly took the oath of allegiance to James I. This doubtless led to his transfer to the Clink, which was much more lenient. There he was set to confer with secular priest Thomas Leek and persuade him to take the oath, and also wrote 'Certain General Reasons, Proving the Lawfulness of the Oath of Allegiance' (1611), allegedly for a friend. This fell into the hands of the archbishop of Canterbury, who urged publication. Sheldon writes still as a Roman Catholic priest, but attacks the Jesuits for exalting papal authority, and denies the pope has power to depose rulers. He argues that they all receive their authority from God, the ultimate source of temporal power, and are irremovable. Such views show to his readers that he was moving to apostasy from Roman Catholicism: this gave the work special propaganda value in Archbishop Abbot's anti-popery campaign. Sheldon may in part have been making a shrewd bid for his patronage. By mid-December 1611 he was reported to have 'gone to church' (ibid., 134). His 'Motives of Richard Sheldon... for his just, voluntary, and free renouncing of communion with the bishop of Rome', published by authority in February 1612, argued that papal authority and other Roman Catholic doctrines were not scriptural nor existed in the early church. At this point he was released and pardoned by the king for activities deemed treasonable under the 1585 act against Jesuits and seminary priests; Bishop James Montague of Bath and Wells took him to kiss the king's hand. On 28 March he preached a sermon in St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on Christ as the sole sacrifice for sin, and the following day seems to have delivered it again as his formal recantation sermon at Paul's Cross; it was subsequently published as 'The First Sermon of R. Sheldon Priest' (1612). 
Sheldon was then employed by James I to write with William Warmington, another former Catholic who had defended the oath of allegiance, a book against Vorstius, but Warmington subsequently reverted to Catholicism, and any resulting book was not published. Sheldon also served as a royal chaplain to James and later to Charles I. Archbishop Abbot presented him to the vicarage of Appledore-with-Ebony, Kent, in November 1612. In his 'Motives' Sheldon had fulminated against clerical celibacy: clearly he found it hard. On 9 March 1613 he married in Hackney Ann (possibly also known as Agnes) Smyth, described in Catholic correspondence as 'a rich maiden or widow' (Questier, 230n.); they had six known children. 
Sheldon's views had become more anti-Catholic by the time 'A Survey of the Miracles of the Church of Rome' was published in 1616, since this identified the pope with Antichrist. Such views supported Archbishop Abbot's campaign against a Spanish match for Prince Charles, but led to a rift with James I. None the less, Sheldon not only preached before the king but also published his 'Christ, on his Throne: not in Popish Secrets' (1622), albeit with an apologetic preface. In 1623 he preached a sermon at Paul's Cross, London, attacking the pope as the beast in 'Revelation', and his followers as damned, for which the king reprimanded him. However, this eventually appeared in print as 'A Sermon... Laying Open the Beast, and his Marks' (1625) as a counterblast to Charles's marriage arrangements for Henrietta Maria of France, which included Roman Catholic toleration in her household and the suspension of the penal laws. Meanwhile Sheldon was not without patrons: he was created an honorary DD of Cambridge and was instituted to the vicarage of Bearstead, Kent, in November 1624. Under Charles I he sought favour by a treatise on the royal prerogative, but Archbishop Laud ignored it, and Sheldon petitioned for its return five years later. 
Sheldon continued as vicar of both his benefices for the rest of his life. His parishioners at Appledore-with-Ebony responded to the 1640 Kentish petition against the clergy by recounting that Sheldon had left two competent curates undisturbed on his institution, in Ebony's case at the parishioners' request, had raised their salaries and those of their successors to as much as they and their parishioners wished, and had secured hard-working, preaching, men. At Bearstead, he constantly used the prayer book, and catechised with exposition each Sunday. Though he was summoned by the Commons on 4 April 1642 when they investigated Sir Edward Dering's petition supporting the prayer book and royal control of the militia, they let the case lapse. He describes himself as living in Bearstead and as minister of God's word in his will, finalized in September 1648. He was sufficiently well off to leave the equivalent of $300 to each of his three surviving sons, some of which was invested in the East India Company, to dower his two daughters for marriages with gentlemen, and to leave each a silver spoon. He probably died at Bearstead in 1651, his will being proved on 3 December that year by his widow and executrix. 


@@@@@


doc= 25308


Sheldrake, Timothy (bap. 1691?, d. before 1759), botanist, was probably the son of Timothy Sheldrake (died 1717), saddler, and his wife, Anne, baptized at St Gregory, Norwich, on 25 September 1691. In a biographical sketch given to Sir Hans Sloane in 1736 Sheldrake explained that as a youth his leisure had been spent in drawing and painting. He was not successful as a saddler, and, when unemployed, studied natural history. A series of letters written from Norwich to the gardener and botanist Thomas Fairchild (1667-1729) demonstrates his interest in botanical subjects, notably the cultivation of tropical fruit and nut-bearing trees. Needing an occupation, he took over a distilling office adjacent to his saddlery, and found himself required to study botany, chemistry, and the manufacture of drugs. At the same time, he gained a small knowledge of medicine, sometimes being improperly known as MD, and his affairs prospered. 
By this time Sheldrake and his wife, Mary, had baptized two children at St Peter Mancroft, Norwich -- Timothy on 8 February 1729 and Anne on 18 June 1732. When an act was passed in 1736 restricting the sale of distilled spirits, apothecaries were not affected, and Sheldrake wrote to Sloane seeking his advice, as he needed to keep his business going to support a young family. Shortly after, perhaps on Sloane's advice, he moved to Westminster and settled near the Strand. 
Sheldrake's interest in tropical plants led him to send a letter on the causes of heat and cold in all climates, which was read to the Royal Society and published in 1756, and to draw up a large chart entitled 'The gardener's best companion in a greenhouse, or, Tables showing the greatest heat and cold of all countries... measured upon the thermometer' (1756), dedicated to Sloane and stated to have the approval of Philip Miller. These tables were based on Sheldrake's naive assumption that temperature at a particular place on the earth was directly related to its latitude. A posthumous work, 'Botanicum Medicinale: an Herbal of Medicinal Plants on the College of Physicians' List' (1759), gave names in nine languages and was illustrated by 120 copper plates, mostly engraved by C. H. Hemerich, and said to be 'from the exquisite drawings of the late ingenious T. Sheldrake'. The work was issued at $3 plain and $6 coloured. A pamphlet by Sheldrake on the 'Norwich Gothic cross' was advertised in the 'Gardener's Companion'. No details of his death are known. 
Sheldrake's son Timothy (1729-1800), lived in the Strand, Westminster, and practised as a truss maker. Known as 'the elder', he and his common-law wife, Christian (died 1813), had several children, of whom the eldest son, Timothy Sheldrake the younger ('b'. 1759), also practised as a truss maker, and was employed by the Westminster Hospital and Marylebone Infirmary. The younger Sheldrake was not medically qualified but the high cost of his appliances gained him a considerable reputation, and he travelled through Britain attending to children of the richer classes. He was latterly in partnership with Henry Bigg. His brother William ('b'. 1770) also practised orthopaedics, and treated Byron's club foot, though apparently without much success. 


@@@@@


doc= 25309


Shelford, Leonard (1795-1864), legal writer, second son of Leonard Shelford BD (died 1813), and his wife, Ellen, daughter of William Grigson of West Wretham, Norfolk, was born on 26 July 1795. His father, who was a fellow of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and rector of North Tuddenham, Norfolk, wanted him to become a solicitor, and he served his articles with William Repton of Aylsham, Norfolk. He then went to the office of Boodle & Co., London, but, deciding to become a barrister, he entered the Middle Temple, and was called to the bar in 1827. For nearly forty years he occupied chambers in the Temple, living the life of a recluse, and compiling a considerable number of legal works, which not only obtained a large circulation in England, but were also reprinted in America, often without the author's consent. Most of these works were legal handbooks but Shelford also prepared new editions of Herbert Broom's 'Practice of the County Courts' (1857) and George Crabb's 'The Conveyancer's Assistant' (1860). Shelford died, unmarried, in his chambers, at 3 Brick Court, Middle Temple, on 17 March 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 25310


Shelley, George (c.1666-c.1736), writing-master, appears to have been born in London. Nothing is known of his early life or parentage except that his poverty is suggested by his education at Christ's Hospital, a charitable institution which primarily took care of London orphans. From these humble beginnings Shelley rose to become one of the pre-eminent and most prolific penmen of his day; indeed, he was described, posthumously, as a 'shining figure in the common-weal of English calligraphy' (Massey, 2.131). 
By 1708 Shelley was living at the Hand and Pen in Warwick Lane where he kept a school. Prior to that he worked as a private tutor teaching penmanship to the children of the gentility. This is evident from 'The Penman's Magazine' (1705), his first published copybook, which was dedicated to his former pupils Ann and Dorothy Sharpe, the daughters of the archbishop of Canterbury. From the outset of his publishing career Shelley's preference for the most decorative genres of penmanship is clear. He was an expert flourisher, writing texts in a variety of hands which were then ornamented with patterns and fantastic figures executed with one continuous stroke of the pen. He could also show more restraint when producing utilitarian texts in 'round hand', the writing style best suited to business transactions. Examples of his more practical penmanship can be found in 'Natural Writing' (1709?) where the trading links were made clear in Shelley's artful and, most probably, uninvited dedication to the directors of the Bank of England. In the preface to this work Shelley went to great lengths to augment his reputation by insisting on the high regard in which he was held by other writing-masters. A certain vanity can also be detected, for instead of praising the engraver George Bickham, as writing-masters usually did, Shelley tried to deter any critics by complaining that 'his Imitation falls short of my originals' (Shelley, preface). His motivation for such unusually self-regarding assertions was probably linked to his application, in the same year, for the prestigious position of writing-master to Christ's Hospital; a fiercely contested post, which Shelley succeeded in winning over eight rival penmen. His sense of competition can also be discerned from the lengthy and public battle which, along with Charles Snell, he waged against the writing-master John Clark. The subject of this debate was the comparative merits of 'sprigging' -- the more artistic aspect of penmanship -- and clear hands designed for the advancement of trade. Rather ironically, although Shelley was considered a master of round hand, he was also a virtuoso of the flourish and consequently he preferred to promote this less accessible aspect of his penmanship. 
After selling up his Warwick Lane academy to John Clark, Shelley established himself at Christ's Hospital and his next published copybook, 'Alphabets in All the Hands' (1710), sold for the benefit of the 'orphans of Christ's Hospital', reflects his pride in his new position. Throughout the remainder of Shelley's career he continued to publish various copybooks, some of which were more biased towards the ornamental hands and decorative texts than others. Despite his many published copybooks, Shelley appears to have led a somewhat dissolute life. In 1725 he was deeply in debt and he was forced to petition the court of Christ's Hospital to advance him $166 to pay his creditors. Matters obviously did not improve as, in 1726, a meeting of the Hospital's committee reported finding that Shelley had absented himself for days and sometimes weeks. Although he pleaded fear of persecution on account of his debts, the Hospital decided that they had been generous enough. Shelley was immediately discharged from his post at Christ's Hospital and was succeeded by Benjamin Durnford. Nothing is known of Shelley's last ten years but William Massey assumed that he died in 'low circumstances' about 1736. 


@@@@@


doc= 25311


Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851), writer, was born at 29 The Polygon, Somers Town, London, on 30 August 1797, the only daughter of William Godwin (1756-1836), author and political philosopher, and the second daughter of Mary Wollstonecraft (1759-1797), author and political philosopher. Wollstonecraft died of puerperal fever eleven days after Mary Godwin was born, and William Godwin undertook to raise their daughter as well as Fanny Godwin (1794-1816), Wollstonecraft's illegitimate daughter with Gilbert Imlay (1754-1828). Mary Jane Godwin (nee Vial; former married name Clairmont) (1768-1841), whom Godwin married in 1801, brought her two illegitimate children to the family: Charles Gaulis Clairmont (1795-1850) and Clara Mary Jane (Claire) Clairmont (1798-1879). The birth of William Godwin jun. (1803-1832) brought to five the siblings who were partially, or by law, related. Presided over by John Opie's portrait of Mary Wollstonecraft that hung in Godwin's study, this unconventional family, in which political idealism and financial distress were part of daily life, brought Mary Godwin an early apprenticeship in the largely unorthodox path she followed throughout her life. 
Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin's education as a child included attendance at a dame-school and a spell of seven months in 1811 at Miss Caroline Petman's school for the daughters of dissenters at Ramsgate, where she had been sent for sea-bathing to treat an infected arm. Unquestionably, however, she received her most important education at home. William Godwin set a high intellectual standard for the household, encouraging the children's aptitudes and imaginations, and instilling in Mary Godwin confidence in her own power and responsibility to effect change as an activist in a society in transition. Under his tutelage, she achieved a solid foundation in history (ancient and modern), mythology, literature, and the 'Bible'; visiting instructors provided art and French lessons. She also studied Latin, an uncommon subject for girls, and attended adult theatre and lectures with her father and family. Mary Godwin adopted her father's deism, which she blended with a poetic pantheism. She also adopted his daily discipline of spending each morning in writing and study, and throughout the course of her life she continued to study widely and in depth. She was fluent in Italian and French, acquired Latin and Greek, and some Spanish. 
The unusual circumstance of two parents whose works voiced and influenced the reformist politics of an age of political, social, and technological revolution developed in Mary Godwin from childhood a keen awareness of the socio-political issues of her era. Her introduction to the 1831 edition of 'Frankenstein' provides a picture of her precocity and her early awareness of her parents' literary significance: 'It is not singular that, as the daughter of two persons of distinguished literary celebrity, I should very early in life have thought of writing. As a child I scribbled; and my favourite pastime, during the hours given me for recreation, was to 'write stories'. (p. v)' To this heritage, Mary Godwin's stepmother, with whom she had a difficult and strained relationship, none the less provided another untraditional role model as an occasional author and as proprietor of the family publishing firm, M. J. Godwin & Co. In addition, the Godwins' many friends and acquaintances included a spectrum of important authors, scientists, and political reformers of the day, who brought to the home a world of ideas and a level of discourse that few girls (or boys, for that matter) would have experienced. Some, like S. T. Coleridge and Charles and Mary Lamb, strongly influenced Mary Shelley's works. 
In 1811 William Godwin described his daughter as 'singularly bold, somewhat imperious, and active of mind. Her desire of knowledge is great and her perseverance in everything she undertakes, almost invincible.' He also commented that she was 'very pretty' (Abinger MSS). Mary Godwin's contribution of a summary sketch for 'Monsieur Nongtongpaw', a comic poem published by M. J. Godwin & Co. in 1809 and often reprinted, demonstrates her precocious intellect, as does Aaron Burr's report of her 1812 'lecture', 'The influence of governments on the character of a people', orated by her brother (Burr, 1.307). Her father's opinion regarding her appearance was confirmed by most observers, who often noted her hazel eyes, light auburn hair, high forehead, and exceptionally fair complexion. R. Easton's posthumous miniature portrait (Bodleian) captures her younger appearance; R. Rothwell's 1840 portrait (National Portrait Gallery), her more mature. 
In June 1812 Mary Godwin was sent to the home of William Baxter, one of Godwin's political admirers, again to treat her infected arm. On 10 November 1812 she and Christina Baxter arrived at the Godwins for a seven-month sojourn in London, and on the next day, Mary Godwin met Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792-1822) and his wife, Harriet, at the Godwin home. In March 1814 Mary Godwin's stay with the Baxters in Dundee ended, and she returned home. In the interval, P. B. Shelley's intellectual pursuits as well as his commitment to provide Godwin with desperately needed financial assistance, had gained him the interest and admiration of the entire Godwin household. In early May, Mary Godwin encountered P. B. Shelley once again, and the pair, often meeting at Wollstonecraft's graveside in St Pancras churchyard, fell in love. Mary Shelley later described that period of her life as 'careless, fearless youth' ('Journals of Mary Shelley', 2.443) and P. B. Shelley praised her for 'The irresi[s]tible wildness & sublimity of her feelings' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.402). They found in each other ideal mates: she, almost seventeen, Godwin's and Wollstonecraft's 'Child of love and light' (P. B. Shelley, 'Revolt of Islam', I.i.9), eager to study and write; he, five years older, already a published poet, and her parents' ardent disciple. 
William Godwin failed in his attempts to convince both his daughter and P. B. Shelley to end the relationship, no doubt in part because of the very arguments against legal marriage advanced in his own and in Wollstonecraft's works. At 5 a.m. on the morning of 28 July, Mary Godwin, accompanied by her stepsister Claire Clairmont, met with P. B. Shelley at a waiting coach, and, with very little money, eloped to the continent. This marked the beginning of the couple's life together, which Mary Godwin described as 'very political as well as poetical' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 1.29), a hectic and passionate amalgam of love, study, creativity, social defiance, and financial skirmishes, which periodically caused her considerable distress. But she recognized her own affinity with that lifestyle, musing that 'The soul only enjoys' serenity 'in passing' but it 'constrains' the imagination 'too much, so that it always comes back to the state it finds more suitable, a state of agitation' ('Journals of Mary Shelley', 2.514). 
While on their unconventional walking tour through war-torn Europe during the lull between Napoleon's first and final defeat, Mary Godwin and P. B. Shelley kept a daily journal, which soon became principally hers, and which she continued to keep until 1844. Mary Shelley's revision of the elopement journal, along with four 1816 letters and P. B. Shelley's poem 'Mont Blanc', was published anonymously as 'History of a Six Weeks' Tour of France, Switzerland, and Germany' (1817). It formed a narrative of the Romantic feelings and observations about nature, social mores, and politics. The elopement journey was the first of their many travels and collaborations, in which they encouraged and inspired each other's writing, at times worked on the same projects, and pursued their iconoclastic lifestyle. Mary Godwin was already pregnant when the elopers, penniless, returned to England in September 1814 and met with almost universal disapproval from family and friends. It was only later, after the loss of P. B. Shelley's protection and wealth, that she was painfully brought to the full realization of the effects of the severe and enduring societal censure placed on her as a result of what she termed 'the outset of my life' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 3.92). 
The death of his grandfather in 1815 brought P. B. Shelley an annual income of $1000, which ended the couple's acute financial difficulties. From August 1815 until April 1816 P. B. Shelley and Mary Godwin made their home at Bishopgate, in Windsor Great Park, which later served as a setting for her third novel, 'The Last Man' (1826). In January 1816 Mary Godwin gave birth to their son William, all the more rejoiced in, as the couple's first daughter, born in London on 22 February 1815, had died twelve days later. 
In May 1816 P. B. and Mary Shelley (as she was slowly becoming known, although they would not marry until later that year) travelled with their four-month-old son and Claire Clairmont to Geneva, Switzerland, with the hopes of remedying P. B. Shelley's poor health. They chose Geneva rather than Italy because Claire Clairmont, who had earlier initiated an affair with Lord Byron, was already pregnant and anxious to see him, in hope of a permanent liaison. For the Shelley-Byron colony of writers and would-be writers, the summer was a period of mutual inspiration and productivity. In her introduction to her 1831 revised edition, Mary Shelley recounted the story, itself part of literary history, of that stormy night in June in which a ghost-writing contest led to her novel 'Frankenstein' (1818). From a 'waking dream' she created an instant myth that captured the public imagination. The story of the scientist and his creature rapidly permeated all levels of society, and became the material of theatrical productions, newspapers, political cartoons, parliamentary debate, translations, and countless inexpensive and/or pirated reprints. 
Mary Shelley's first novel voices the concept of private politics as a mirror image of public politics, a tenet that would pervade all of her major works. She used the trappings of the Gothic novel to illustrate the destructiveness not of science, but of power protected by wealth and position. In the public mind, the nameless Creature has often been given his Creator's name, ironically supporting Mary Shelley's thesis that a corrupt political system equally victimizes the empowered and the disempowered. The best-known fiction of the Romantic era, 'Frankenstein' is credited with introducing the science fiction genre into English literature. 
Initially, critics believed 'Frankenstein' was written by a man. Walter Scott proposed the author was P. B. Shelley, beginning a chain of criticism that has endured to the present. Analysis of the novel, whether favourable or not, was conducted in terms of its reformist political vision, which grappled with the social, scientific, industrial, and economic issues of the era. Once it was discovered that its author was a woman, however, critics seldom directly addressed the novel's politics, considered a 'male topic'. Like P. B. Shelley and other English Romantics, Mary Shelley utilized her own experiences to interpret society, revered nature as a source of renewal, and was committed to public and domestic reform based on democratic principles, education, and expansive love. But the traditional bias against intellectual women caused most contemporary reviewers to evaluate her novels largely as romances, although the fervent animus of some reviews may have resulted from the unspoken belief that her work would be dangerous to the 'status quo'. The power and imagination of her writing was recognized by various commentators with the dubious compliment that she had a 'masculine mind'. 
On the Shelleys' return to England in 1816, they first took lodgings in Bath to prevent William and Mary Jane Godwin from learning of Clairmont's pregnancy. That autumn two tragedies deeply affected the Shelley-Godwin circle. On 9 October Fanny Imlay Godwin committed suicide at Swansea. And on 9 November Harriet Shelley, in an advanced state of pregnancy, drowned herself in the Thames, her body not being discovered until 10 December. On 30 December, with the Godwins as witnesses, the Shelleys were married at St Mildred's Church, London, thus healing the breach between father and daughter. In March 1817 the Shelleys moved to Albion House, Marlow, where they remained until they left for the continent in March 1818. To both Shelleys' great disappointment, the court of chancery that spring refused P. B. Shelley's efforts to gain custody of Ianthe and Charles Shelley, his children with Harriet Shelley. 
Mary Shelley's letters and journal express her eagerness to have children; she gave birth to her second daughter, Clara Everina Shelley, at Bishopgate on 2 September 1817. In March 1818 the Shelley entourage, including Claire Clairmont and her daughter Clara Allegra Byron, travelled to the warmer climate of Italy to treat P. B. Shelley's illness, which had been diagnosed as pulmonary disease (White, 1.538). In Italy they continued their intellectual practice of wide reading and writing, expanded their social circle, and frequently changed residences. At Leghorn Mary Shelley reintroduced herself to Maria (Reveley) Gisborne (who had cared for her during Wollstonecraft's final days), and her husband, John Gisborne, with whom she and P. B. Shelley formed a lifelong friendship. 
From Leghorn, the Shelleys moved to the Casa Bertini in Bagni di Lucca, in the foothills of the Apennines, an area of Tuscany rich in the history of Castruccio Castracani, the subject of Mary Shelley's next novel. From there, they moved to Venice and Este, so that Claire Clairmont could visit her daughter Allegra, who was in Byron's custody. The infant Clara Shelley, already ill before the journey, died of dysentery at Venice on 24 September 1818. On that day, Mary Shelley noted: 'This is the Journal book of misfortunes' ('Journals of Mary Shelley', 1.226). After wintering at Naples the Shelleys travelled to Rome in April 1819, where on 7 June William died of malaria, further devastating both Shelleys. Mary Shelley, already expecting her fourth child, suffered a severe depression, and, always of a more reserved nature, she withdrew further into herself and away from P. B. Shelley. The two tragedies caused considerable strain in the Shelleys' relationship, a strain, it has been suggested, which may also have been exacerbated by P. B. Shelley's attraction to other women. But the Shelleys' union, from its dramatic beginning, favoured the concept of expansive rather than exclusive love, as articulated in Mary Shelley's letters during her brief love experiment in 1814-15 with P. B. Shelley's friend Thomas Jefferson Hogg, and in P. B. Shelley's poem 'Epipsychidion'. Nevertheless, Mary Shelley became impatient when she felt his inclusivity demanded too much attention, as it had with Claire Clairmont. 
Perhaps as a means to return the Shelleys to their usual empathy, their next projects were written in close collaboration. While at Leghorn from June until October 1819, they borrowed a holograph transcription of the 'Relazione della morte della famiglia Cenci seguita in Roma il di II Maggio 1599', which Mary Shelley copied. Based on her copy, P. B. Shelley wrote his tragedy 'The Cenci', the story of the Cenci family's history of incest and murder, and Mary Shelley translated the story into English, which the Shelleys originally intended to publish with the play. During the same period, Mary Shelley wrote 'Matilda', a fictional account of a father's incestuous love for his daughter. William Godwin, and then Mary Shelley herself, withheld the novella from publication, fearing that a woman's writing on this taboo topic would provoke a scandal akin to those generated by Godwin's publication of Wollstonecraft's 'Memoirs' and by the Shelleys' elopement. Not published until 1959, 'Matilda' has often been construed in narrow biographical terms, but recent scholarship has reinterpreted it in terms of its literary complexity of character and narrative voice. As a result, 'Matilda' is often placed among Mary Shelley's most accomplished works. 
From Leghorn, the Shelleys went to Florence, where they resided at Palazzo Marini, via Valfonda 4395, where their fourth, and only surviving child, Percy Florence Shelley, was born on 12 November 1819. They intended to remain in Florence so that Mary Shelley could continue her research for the historical novel she had begun in Marlow in 1817, 'Valperga, or, The Life and Death of Castruccio Castracani', published in 1823 for her father's benefit. In January 1820, however, they moved to Pisa, their home for the following year and a half, where they formed an international circle of British, Greek, and Italian friends. In May 1822 the Shelleys and their friends the Williamses moved to Casa Magni at San Terenzo for the summer, where the next month, Mary Shelley suffered a near fatal miscarriage. Then, on 8 July, the Shelleys' life together came to a tragic close: P. B. Shelley and Edward Williams, returning from welcoming Leigh and Marianne Hunt to Italy, drowned in a squall in the gulf of Spezia. 
Although deeply bereaved, Mary Shelley, almost immediately after P. B. Shelley's death, expressed her confidence in her ability to write and to raise her son. She was also determined to bring P. B. Shelley the widespread recognition that he had failed to receive in his lifetime, by editing and publishing his works. Within a year after P. B. Shelley's death, she published her own 'A Tale of the Passions', and two essays, 'Madame D'Houtetot', and 'Giovanni Villani', as well as P. B. Shelley's texts, in 'The Liberal'. 
Initially, Mary Shelley had planned to remain on the continent, which she found more conducive to her independent temperament. But Sir Timothy Shelley, P. B. Shelley's father, who refused ever to meet her, would not consider any support for Percy Florence unless he was raised in England. For her son's sake, she returned in August 1823 and spent most of the remainder of her life as an 'exile' in a conservative England that was inhospitable to her ambitions and her intellect. Sir Timothy granted a repayable allowance for Percy Florence that carried with it serious restrictions for Mary Shelley. After the publication of her edition of P. B. Shelley's 'Posthumous Poems' (1824), Sir Timothy withdrew the allowance, demanded the volume be withdrawn, and prohibited Mary Shelley from publishing P. B. Shelley's works or bringing the Shelley name to public attention. Two years later, he temporarily withheld the allowance when a critic cited her name in a review of 'The Last Man', which had been published as 'by the author of 'Frankenstein''. Despite his power over her, Mary Shelley over the years found a number of ways to circumvent his restriction just as she persistently negotiated for additional funds as Percy Florence's educational needs increased. 
Over the next two decades Mary Shelley published several dozen reviews, short-stories, and poems, as well as some of P. B. Shelley's works, in prominent London journals and the then popular annuals. Her own ambitions, however, went far beyond the periodical press. As she announced to Leigh Hunt on 9 February 1824, 'I am going to plunge into a novel, and hope that its clear water will wash off the... mud of the magazines' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 1.412). That novel was 'The Last Man' (1826). Set in the twenty-first century, it focuses on six characters whose lives are dramatically interwoven with private and public issues of power when a cataclysmic plague seemingly destroys every person on earth except one, Lionel Verney, the narrator of the novel. This highly political work of fiction, with its graphic scenes of death and war, received almost universally scathing reviews. Dismissed as another end-of-the-world work of the kind then popular, with its fundamental thesis of the imagination as curative and its parable of personal and societal politics, the novel was alien to contemporary critics. Today, 'The Last Man' is generally regarded as her second best novel. 
Mary Shelley's next major work returned to the genre of the historical novel. 'The Fortunes of Perkin Warbeck' (1830) is set in the fifteenth century, and presents a retelling of the events surrounding the struggles of Perkin Warbeck, who claimed to be Richard, duke of York, to wrest the English throne from Henry VII. Although it portrays Henry as ruthless and manipulative and Richard as seemingly idealistic and caring, the novel enunciates her philosophy that, in the end, there is little difference between men who destroy nations in the interest of their own power. 'Lodore' (1835), her fifth novel, and 'Falkner' (1837), her sixth and final novel, were to continue this theme, but differ from her earlier work in their shift away from supernatural or historical settings to contemporary stories in which private politics metaphorically critique the limitations of the conventional Victorian class and legal systems. Between 1832 and 1839, while she was completing 'Lodore' and 'Falkner', Mary Shelley also contributed the vast majority of the essays comprising the five volumes of the Revd Dionysius Lardner's 'Cabinet of biography: lives of the most eminent literary and scientific men of Italy, Spain and Portugal' (1835-7) and 'Lives of the most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of France' (1838-9). Drawing on her past readings and current research, the 'Lives' astutely profile a wide spectrum of figures within their historical context while continuing to reflect her reformist vision. 
Mary Shelley's determination to reprint her husband's works had not waned during this time, and in 1839 Edward Moxon published her carefully edited collections: 'The Poetical Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley' (4 vols.), and 'Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments by Percy Bysshe Shelley' (2 vols.). Her one-volume edition of his poetical works, also published by Moxon, is dated 1840. In order to circumvent Sir Timothy's restriction on biography, she included annotations that placed the works within their historical context. The edition is regarded as a turning point in the acceptance of P. B. Shelley as a major author, and despite their strategic reticence, her notes have proved an invaluable resource for future biographers and critics. 
After her return to England in 1823, Mary Shelley had formed new friendships with a number of leading figures of the day, including Frances Wright, Prosper Merimee, Thomas Moore, Lady Morgan, Caroline Norton, and John Howard Payne. She continued her friendship with the Lambs and Thomas Love Peacock and renewed her girlhood friendship with Isabella Baxter Booth. She also became a close friend of the Joshua Robinson and Beauclerk families, and played a major role in a transgender deception in which the writer Mary Diana Dods passed as 'Mr Sholto Douglas' and Isabella Robinson successfully passed as 'his wife' in an elite Anglo-French circle in Paris. Of her circle in Italy, she remained close friends only with Jane Williams and the Gisbornes. And almost until the end of her life, she and Claire Clairmont sparred, at times drawing together in mutual aid. 
Although Mary Shelley at times found wanted comfort and companionship in male and female friendships, she never formed another relationship that approached the one she had shared with P. B. Shelley. She rejected offers of marriage from Payne and Edward John Trelawny, expressed interest in Washington Irving, and appears to have formed an intimacy with Aubrey Beauclerk, a Liberal MP, which ended in disappointment. As she wrote, 'I have always felt certain that I should never again change my name -- & that is a comfort, it a pretty & a dear one' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 2.204). 
Always pressed for funds, Mary Shelley moved frequently, residing mainly in the area of greater London, but from 1833 until 1836 at Harrow on the Hill, in order for Percy Florence Shelley to attend Harrow School. Later, she would see that he attended Trinity College, Cambridge, as well, fulfilling P. B. Shelley's and her own educational aspirations for their son. Despite her own financial restrictions, she habitually aided her father, her widowed stepmother, and many others in her circle. 
With the impetus to provide funds for an Italian expatriate who would later try to blackmail her, Mary Shelley wrote the two-volume 'Rambles in Germany and Italy, in 1840, 1842, and 1843' (1844), her last full-length work, based on letters written during two journeys that she had taken with Percy Florence and several of his friends. Unlike most other works in the popular genre of travel memoirs, 'Rambles' interpolates a strong Romantic reformist perspective through its commentaries on war, national manners, historical perspectives, and politics. 
In 1844 Sir Timothy Shelley's death left the encumbered part of the estate to Mary and Percy Florence Shelley, who also inherited the title. For the first time since P. B. Shelley's death, she knew financial security. But it would only be four years later, with the marriage of Percy Florence Shelley and the widowed Jane Gibson St John, that Mary Shelley again had a domestic circle in which she felt genuine love and contentment. Throughout the last decade of her life, she suffered from periods of intense headaches, as well as pain and paralysis in her arm. Nevertheless, she travelled, made changes to her editions of P. B. Shelley, and as late as 1848 returned to work again on the biography of her husband that she had begun years earlier. But illness, first that of her daughter-in-law, then her own, put an end to that plan. On 1 February 1851, already in a coma, Mary Shelley died of a brain tumour at her home at 24 Chester Square, London. The younger Shelleys fulfilled her wish of burial with her parents by removing Wollstonecraft's and Godwin's remains from the St Pancras churchyard and burying all three on 8 February in St Peter's Church, Bournemouth, near Boscombe, the Shelleys' home. 
During her lifetime, Mary Shelley was celebrated as the author of the extraordinary 'Frankenstein' and otherwise generally regarded as a gifted writer of romances. Since that time, her own accomplishments were subsumed under P. B. Shelley's, even to the extent of wrongly crediting 'Frankenstein' in large measure to him rather than to the actual author. Critics continued to ignore Mary Shelley's vision, which depicted the limitations of conventional values through her metaphoric use of public and domestic abuse of power, advocating instead an egalitarian, humane system based on reason and universal love. Her own family abetted the depoliticization and domestication of Mary Shelley's works, which was not an unusual development within the context of Victorian conventional presumptions of women's ambitions, intellect, and concerns. Whatever her frustrations and occasional ambivalence in her struggle as a single, independent, intellectual woman, however, she had always held to the belief that it was her 'fate' to be a writer ('Journals of Mary Shelley', 2.431-2, 'Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 3.105). 
Mary Shelley's unusual childhood prepared her for that destiny; her adult life fostered her aspiration with each major work to achieve more 'in the staircase I am climbing' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 1.361). Reassessment of her works in the mid- to later twentieth century initially often depicted her as a victim of conventional expectations for women. Readers, however, spurred by the women's movement, began to recognize her as a Romantic whose inherent independence of vision and political dissonance required further reconsideration. The impetus for this change in perspective originated in renewed interest in 'Frankenstein', as the ethical dilemmas posed by technological and medical advances increasingly resonated with the novel's prescient examination of power and responsibility. As a result, in the closing quarter of the twentieth century, new editions of Mary Shelley's novels, short stories, letters, and journals were published that provided a wide opportunity to read her works unfiltered by nineteenth-century mores. In this period, upwards of 500 books and scholarly articles as well as countless review articles appeared that discuss Mary Shelley and her works. 

'Frankenstein' also holds an enduring place within popular culture, quickly becoming a common, often misunderstood, metaphor. In 1824 George Canning in parliamentary debate argued that freeing the West Indian slave 'in the manhood of his physical strength, in the maturity of his physical passion, but in the infancy of his uninstructed reason, would raise up a creature resembling the splendid fiction of a recent romance' ('Hansard 2', 10, 16 March 1824, 1103). Charles Sumner, an American statesman, during the American Civil War equated 'the Southern Confederacy with the soulless monster of Frankenstein. The wretched creation of a mortal science without God; endowed with life and nothing else' (R. Florescu, 'In Search of Frankenstein', 1999, 14). Some decades later, Sir John Lubbock argued in parliament that it 'would be impossible to control the Frankensteins we have ourselves created', the Frankensteins in this case being liberal reforms (ibid.). 
The story of the creature and the scientist has been drawn on as the basis of more than one hundred stage productions, beginning with Richard Brinsley Peake's 1823 'Presumption' in London, which inspired fourteen other dramatizations within three years in France and England (S. E. Forry, 'Hideous Progenies', ix). 'Frankenstein''s film history began with Thomas Edison's 1910 production, but indisputably the most influential screen production was the 1931 version directed by James Whale, and starring Boris Karloff as the creature, a role that he reprised in 'The Bride of Frankenstein' (1935) and 'Son of Frankenstein' (1939). Karloff's presentation of the creature, with its halting movements and its prominent scars, has remained imprinted on the popular consciousness, a pervasive cultural icon with which every subsequent cinematic interpretation has had to deal. The numerous serious film versions that followed have, to date, failed to capture the complexities of the novel, or replace the Karloff image in the popular imagination. Persistent cinematic interest has also spawned comedic versions which helped to contribute to the popular dissemination and distortion of the original work; Mel Brooks's 'Young Frankenstein' (1974) is the most famous and enduring of these satires, but also influential in this regard was the 1960s television series 'The Munsters'. The creature and the scientist, in various incarnations, also appear commonly in cartoons, advertisements, comic books, toys, records, CD-ROMs, and on the internet. 
Notwithstanding these numerous popular interpretations and adaptations of 'Frankenstein', the novel and Mary Shelley's other texts are increasingly the focus of scholarly interest and literary investigation. As a result, large numbers of readers have come to appreciate the complexities of the original novel that Mary Shelley referred to as her 'defence of Polypheme' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 1.91). Mary Shelley's international significance was demonstrated in 1997, as bicentennial conferences and exhibits in Australia, the United States, and Europe celebrating her birth explored the meaning of her works and her philosophy. The unusual attention given the discovery of her lost children's story 'Maurice' and its 1998 publication represent another marker of the recognition of Mary Shelley's increased stature. Re-evaluation of Mary Shelley's literary achievements is currently very much in process, and her overall significance is yet to be recognized. More than 245 editions of 'Frankenstein' have been published, including translations in Chinese, French, German, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Spanish, and Swedish. If she had created only 'Frankenstein', her significance in literary history would be secure; but a full understanding of the import of all of her major works may change our understanding of literary history as well. 


@@@@@


doc= 25312


Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822), poet, was born on 4 August 1792 at Field Place, near Horsham in Sussex, the eldest son of Timothy, afterwards Sir Timothy Shelley, baronet (1753-1844), and his wife, Elizabeth (1763-1846), daughter of Charles Pilfold. He was baptized at Warnham, Sussex, on 7 September 1792. 
Shelley had four younger sisters and one younger brother: Elizabeth (1794-1831), to whom he was evidently close; Mary (1797-1884); Hellen (1799-1885), whose letters about Shelley's childhood, though written in the 1850s, are an invaluable mine of information (they are included in Hogg); Margaret (1801-1887); and John (1806-1866). The Shelley family had migrated to America in the person of the poet's great-grandfather Timothy (1700-1771). His son Sir Bysshe Shelley (1731-1815) returned to England, adding substantially to the family fortune and social status by two successive marriages, each involving elopement: the first with Mary Catherine Mitchell (1734-1760, married 1752); the second with Elizabeth Jane Sidney (1741-1781, married 1769). 
Often Shelley is seen as something of a genetic mystery: where, it is asked, with his stolid background did he get his unique poetic genius? Perhaps his grandfather Sir Bysshe Shelley, a domineering figure, offers something of an answer. In a letter of 1812 Shelley wrote of him with distaste as 'a bad man' and 'a curse on society' for whom he 'never had respect' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.239). Yet Shelley may have had more in common with his grandfather than he cared to notice. Edmund Blunden sees in a portrait of Sir Bysshe the depiction of 'a sort of mystic, who trusted in the discovery of truths less by system than by sudden light through the clouds' (Blunden, 18). Certainly Shelley inherited his intrepid courage and resoluteness. 
The poet's father -- well-meaning, decent, and utterly conventional -- was a member of parliament for New Shoreham, a borough controlled by the duke of Norfolk, who was a supporter of the whig leader, Charles James Fox. Shelley grew up, therefore, in a climate sympathetic to whig notions of liberty, notions that had some influence on, even as they were outdone by, his mature political views; he assumed (as is witnessed by a letter he wrote to Leigh Hunt while at Oxford) that on attaining twenty-one he would enter public life, filling his father's seat ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.55). At the same time Shelley would have noticed, as Hunt points out in an incisive analysis of the 'Whig Aristocrats' to whom the poet's family belonged, the gap between 'professed demands of what is right and noble' and 'real inculcations of what is wrong and full of hypocrisy' (Holmes, 12-13). 
Shelley's mother is usually treated as a peripheral presence in his life. But there is a growing recognition that she (and the family dynamics of which she and her son were a central part) may well provide a key to understanding the poet's complex personality. Shelley was largely silent about her, and yet his poetry shows a strong concern with the relations between mother and child, as well as between father and child. To judge from scattered anecdotes and the portrait of her by George Romney painted in May 1795, Elizabeth Shelley was an attractive, somewhat formidable woman who took pride in her son's cleverness; she liked to talk of his learning by heart, after one reading, Gray's 'Ode on the Death of a Favourite Cat'. Shelley grew up in a largely female household, much admired by his sisters. Elizabeth left no record of her memories, but Hellen remembered her considerably older brother as 'full of cheerful fun' if somewhat wild, telling his sisters stories of ghosts, alchemists, and the ''Great Tortoise' that lived in Warnham Pond', and given to nocturnal walks, flights of fancy, and experiments involving 'electricity' (Hogg, 1.25, 22, 25, 23). There is a sense in poems such as the rhapsodic 'Epipsychidion' (1821) that Shelley tries to create in imagination some equivalent to the emotional harmony he had known as a boy, the centre of female attention. 
At the age of six Shelley went daily to the school run by the curate at Warnham, the Revd Evan Edwards. Here he began to learn Latin and Greek, languages of great importance for his poetic development; his father, thinking to make Shelley 'a good and gentlemanly Scholar' (Blunden, 12), no doubt hoped that a grounding in the classics would help his son's political career. When Shelley was ten he transferred to Syon House Academy, Isleworth, with his older cousin Thomas Medwin. The school was run by the Revd Dr Greenlaw and was not enjoyed by Shelley, who 'passed among his schoolfellows', according to Medwin, 'as a strange and unsocial being' (Mullan, 145). There is a drawing, probably of Shelley at this age, by Antoine-Philippe, duc de Montpensier. It shows a sensitive but determined face, with a strong nose, firm mouth, and calm eyes. At Syon House Shelley was teased and bullied, yet he found refuge from the traumas of school in reading Gothic romances. Here he attended lectures by Adam Walker on nature and science, which fired his imagination; the final act of 'Prometheus Unbound' (1820) is the fruit of his passion for a type of scientific enquiry appropriately described as 'speculative and imaginative' (Holmes, 16). 
In 1804 Shelley went to Eton College. There he was tormented, as at Syon House, by his fellows, especially in his early years at the school. The headmaster until 1809 was Dr Goodall, a jovial figure; in 1809 he gave way to his assistant John Keate, a sterner disciplinarian. At Eton, Shelley showed a characteristic refusal to submit to authority (he disliked the practice of fagging) as well as a capacity for anger in the face of injustice which stayed with him, for both good and ill. The poet who flayed political oppression in 'The Mask of Anarchy' (1819) was also the young man who wrote some singularly violent letters to his father and sharply recriminating letters to his deserted first wife. One schoolfellow, W. H. Merle, recalled his response to the 'practical jokes' to which he was subjected as 'a paroxysm of anger which made his eyes flash like a tiger's' (Blunden, 27). During his time at Eton, Shelley excelled in composing Latin verse; he translated half of Pliny's 'Natural History', and came into contact with Dr James Lind, a scholar who served as something of a mentor and father figure for Shelley. Indeed, his final years at school seem to have been relatively happy. He enjoyed walking in the vicinity of the school, and a friend, Halliday, recalled 'the sparkling poetry of his mind' which 'shone out of his speaking eye, when he was dwelling on anything good or great' (ibid., 28). Shelley was still at Eton when he wrote and published a Gothic romance called 'Zastrozzi' (Wilkie and Robinson, 1810). Like its successor 'St Irvyne, or, The Rosicrucian' (published during Shelley's first term at Oxford by John Joseph Stockdale in December 1810, despite the 1811 date on its title-page), 'Zastrozzi' attempts to cash in on the vogue for sensationalist fiction. But both novels warrant attention as looking ahead, in their concern with oppression, revolt, and subversion, to Shelley's more mature use of Gothic elements. 
When Shelley went up to University College, Oxford, in 1810 he was already a published poet, the co-author with his sister Elizabeth of 'Original Poetry by Victor and Cazire', published by Stockdale in 1810 but withdrawn after the discovery that one poem had been plagiarized from Monk Lewis. (Shelley blamed Elizabeth for this.) Some lyrics addressed to Shelley's cousin Harriet Grove (1791-1867), with whom he was in love, have an ease and grace that look ahead to much finer work, and hint at the metrical command characteristic of his mature writing. The budding love affair with Harriet Grove was a casualty of Shelley's increasingly fervent opposition to Christianity, an opposition which culminated in his expulsion from University College on 25 March 1811 after refusing to disavow authorship of 'The Necessity of Atheism' (printed in Worthing by C. and W. Phillips in 1811). This work was co-written with Thomas Jefferson Hogg, who was also expelled, after insisting that he share Shelley's punishment. According to Hogg, Shelley was presented at his interview with a sentence of expulsion that had already been 'drawn up in due form, under the seal of the college' (Hogg, 1.169). Hogg was a fellow student at University College, and Shelley's closest friend at Oxford. In his 'Life' he has left a vivid if mischievous portrait of Shelley the undergraduate: a poetic genius, intellectually brilliant, and devoted to liberty in all forms, and yet the object of the biographer's worldly amusement. Hogg likes to present Shelley as wildly eccentric, snatching a baby from its mother's arms on Magdalen Bridge to see whether it would 'tell us anything about pre-existence' (ibid., 1.147), or falling asleep in front of a fire 'like a cat' (ibid., 1.59) before waking up and plunging straightaway into argument or reciting verse. These anecdotes, like so many told about Shelley, seem at once melodramatic and to contain a germ of truth. Hogg also praises Shelley's 'pure, entire, and perfect gentility' (ibid., 1.130). This quality, blended 'intimately with his entire nature', was commented on by many of Shelley's friends: according to Byron 'Never did a more finished gentleman than Shelley step across a drawing-room!' (ibid.); for him Shelley was 'the most gentle, most amiable, and 'least' worldly-minded person I ever met' (Cameron, 87). 
Shelley found the university academically uninspiring, but he continued with his reading and scientific experiments. Hogg claims that he helped Shelley to compose the seemingly burlesque but covertly anti-establishment collection of poems, 'Posthumous Fragments of Margaret Nicholson' (published by Munday in 1810), an early example of Shelley's ability to deploy humour for serious ends. If that work failed to stir suspicion, 'The Necessity of Atheism' went out of its way to provoke: its nonchalant conclusion, 'Every reflecting mind must allow that there is no proof of the existence of a Deity. Q.E.D.' ('Prose Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 5), was, in particular, designed to vex the bishops, heads of colleges, and clergymen to whom the authors sent their pamphlet, often under assumed names. 'Poetical Essay on the Existing State of Things', also published by Munday, was advertised in the 'Oxford University and City Herald' for 9 March 1811 as 'Just Published, Price Two Shillings'. A copy of this poem, 172 lines of rhyming couplets, came to light in 2006; it was donated in 2015 to the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and made available online ('Shelley's Poetical Essay', 2015). The poem, attributed to 'A GENTLEMAN OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD' and accompanied by a preface opposed to war and advocating 'gradual, yet decided intellectual exertions' (p. 6), is dedicated to Harriet Westbrook (1795-1816), who would become Shelley's first wife, and has an epigraph from Southey's 'The Curse of Kehama' about the horror of famine, plus a declaration that it was written for 'ASSISTING TO MAINTAIN IN PRISON, MR. PETER FINNERTY, IMPRISONED FOR A LIBEL'. Finnerty was an Irish journalist, who, as a war correspondent for the 'Morning Chronicle', reported in highly critical terms on a botched expedition to Walcheren in 1809 in which thousands of British soldiers died in a failed attempt to establish a line of attack against the French. He was later imprisoned for allegedly libelling Lord Castlereagh. Castlereagh, Finnerty claimed, had tried to suppress the latter's reports. Shelley's poem exhibits its radical leanings through its praise of the whig MP, Sir Francis Burdett, its echoes of Godwin, its attacks on war and 'Oppression', and its ardent libertarian rhetoric: 'Man must assert his native rights, must say / We take from Monarchs' hand the granted sway'. There are fascinating anticipations of later poetry, especially but not only explicitly political productions such as 'Queen Mab' and 'The Mask of Anarchy'. The elegiac mention of 'The sternly wise, the mildly good', for example, looks ahead to lines in 'Mont Blanc' about the 'voice' 'which the wise, and great, and good / Interpret, or make felt, or deeply feel', the companion of 'awful doubt, or faith so mild'. Burdett as a 'taintless emanation from the sky' seems, momentarily, a forerunner of the dead Keats in 'Adonais'. 
The expulsion from Oxford heralded a difficult period in Shelley's life. He moved to London, taking lodgings with Hogg at 15 Poland Street. His relations with his father deteriorated as he resisted Sir Timothy's attempts to make him forswear his atheism. At a loss to know how to manage his wayward son, Sir Timothy placed responsibility for dealing with Shelley with his solicitor William Whitton. Shelley, meanwhile, embarked on a period of restless wandering and growing involvement in political agitation. In August of this year he eloped with and married Harriet Westbrook, a fellow pupil of his sisters at a school in Clapham. Harriet was the sixteen-year-old daughter of the well-off owner of a coffee house. In an age of sharp social divisions she would have been regarded as beneath Shelley, and it cannot have been lost on her parents and her considerably older sister Eliza ('b'. 1782), who would become one of Shelley's bitterest enemies, that a match between her and the heir to Field Place would have its advantages. Unhappy at her school, Harriet wrote plaintively to Shelley, who had gone in July to Cwm Elan in Radnorshire, the estate of his cousin Thomas Grove, and who was maintaining an impressive if high-flown correspondence with Elizabeth Hitchener, a Sussex schoolteacher known to his uncle Captain Pilfold. The young poet described to Hogg the gist of Harriet's most significant letter thus: 'she would fly with me, & threw herself on my protection' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.131). The couple eloped, arriving in Edinburgh on 28 August, where they were soon joined by Hogg, and, despite Shelley's objections to marriage as fettering free enquiry, were married the next day. It was to prove among the most fateful events in Shelley's life. 
An immediate consequence was the breakdown of Shelley's relationship with his father, who cut off his allowance and ceased to communicate with his son. An indignant letter from Shelley to his father in October tells Sir Timothy, 'You have treated me 'ill', 'vilely'' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.149). Shelley had by this stage moved to 20 Coney Street, York. During this period his letters to his father oscillate between self-justification and an implicit desire for his father's approval. Late in October he visited Cuckfield, staying with Captain Pilfold, and causing considerable turmoil, partly by accusing his mother of having an affair with Edward Graham, a music teacher and protege of Shelley's parents. On his return to York, Shelley discovered that Hogg had taken his friend's anti-matrimonial beliefs with inappropriate literalness and had tried to seduce Harriet. Shelley's letters to Hogg from Keswick, to which he, Harriet, and Eliza Westbrook (who had joined Harriet in York during Shelley's absence) had now moved, declare love for and disapproval of Hogg in equal measure, and it is clear that he was devastated by the temporary breakdown of their friendship. 
In Keswick, Shelley met and exchanged ideas with Robert Southey, who treated the young radical poet with sympathy and middle-aged scepticism: 'he has a very happy knack', Shelley wrote to Hitchener, 'when truth goes against him of saying, 'Ah! when you are as old as I am you will think with me'' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.223). Shelley grew disenchanted with Southey, but the encounter made a powerful impact on both men. Shelley quotes Southey's remark that the younger man was 'not an Atheist but a Pantheist' (ibid., 1.219), while Southey, on whom Shelley acted as his 'own ghost', put Shelley 'upon a course of Berkeley' (ibid.), which led ultimately to Shelley's formulation of his own 'intellectual philosophy' (Reiman and Powers, 477) in his essay 'On life' (1819). Southey appears to have discussed Wordsworth with Shelley, who sent off to Hitchener an early version of what ended up as 'A Tale of Society as it is, from Facts', a poem that shows Wordsworthian influence in its plain diction and sensitive rhythms. This poem was included in a collection of his early work transcribed in the so-called 'Esdaile Notebook', which Shelley tried but failed to have published in 1813. 
In January 1812 Shelley began a significant correspondence with William Godwin, the author of 'Enquiry Concerning Political Justice' (1793) and the poet's future father-in-law. 'Political Justice', which Shelley may have first read while still at Eton, exercised a durable influence over his mind: he told Godwin that it changed him from 'the votary of Romance' into someone aware he 'had duties to perform' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.227-8). Godwin's belief that human beings must be guided by rational self-rule and his faith in perfectibility pervade much of Shelley's mature work. Tension, however, as much as devotion is apparent in their relationship, and Shelley's visit to Ireland (February-April 1812) in support of agitation to repeal the 'Act of Union' and secure Catholic emancipation was frowned on by his mentor, who preferred a quieter way of working towards a better world. Shelley wrote two pamphlets on Irish affairs, 'An Address, to the Irish People', aimed at poor Irish Catholics and energetically distributed by the young aristocrat, who threw copies at likely passers-by from his balcony in Sackville Street, and 'Proposals for an Association of Philanthropists', which is especially notable for its analysis of what went wrong with the French Revolution and for its commitment to the Godwinian belief that 'We are in a state of continually progressive improvement' ('Prose Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 52). Shelley's involvement in Ireland's troubled politics was short-lived but more than merely farcical. At the very least, his efforts brought him up hard against the obdurate realities of specific political problems. 
Finally responding to Godwin's objections, Shelley, Harriet, and Eliza departed from Dublin on 4 April to live in a variety of dwellings, first in Nantgwillt, Radnorshire, then, briefly, in June with the Groves at Cwm Elan where Shelley wrote 'The Retrospect', among his most accomplished and self-revealing earlier poems. By the end of June the party was living in Lynmouth in north Devon. Here Shelley completed and distributed his prose work 'A Letter to Lord Ellenborough', protesting against Lord Ellenborough's harsh sentencing (prison and pillory) of Daniel Isaac Eaton, a radical bookseller. With Elizabeth Hitchener, who joined the Shelley household in mid-July, he distributed copies of the revolutionary 'A Declaration of Rights' and the broadsheet ballad 'The Devil's Walk' by various means, including bottles thrown into the sea and even home-made fire balloons. In August Daniel Healey, Shelley's Irish servant, was arrested in Barnstaple for posting copies of 'A Declaration of Rights' and imprisoned for six months, an event which brought Shelley's radical activities to the attention of the Home Office. The decision was taken not to prosecute Shelley for his seditious behaviour, but to have him watched. In the meantime, however, Shelley, with his female companions, left Lynmouth, giving the authorities the slip, and virtually stumbled on the would-be model village of Tremadoc created by William Madocks out of land reclaimed from the sea. Shelley supported this project, but over the months he came into conflict with local interests, a conflict culminating in his forced departure from his rented house (Tan-yr-Allt) in February 1813, after supposedly grappling with and being shot at by (and possibly himself firing at) a nocturnal assailant. Traditionally dismissed in the words of Thomas Love Peacock as a 'sort of semi-delusion' (Mullan, 315), Shelley's account of the incident has recently received cautious endorsement. 
Between late 1812 and July 1814 Shelley's personal life went through a phase of great turbulence. In October 1812 he first met Godwin and through him other figures such as the eccentric John Frank Newton, whose vegetarian and Zoroastrian ideas made a considerable impression on the poet; about this time, too, he met Peacock, a man different in temperament from Shelley, but sharing with him and, indeed, doing much to foster in the younger poet over the years a love of classical literature: a love with heterodox ideological implications. In November 1812 Elizabeth Hitchener, who had, in Harriet's words, turned out to be a 'great disappointment' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.331), left Shelley's household in a manner that suggests she was virtually expelled. Shelley emerges somewhat tarnished from the affair. To Hogg he acknowledged the 'fatuity, inconsistency, and bad taste' apparent in his idealization of his former Platonic soulmate, now known as the 'Brown Demon' (ibid., 1.336), and he arranged to pay her a small stipend. 
After leaving Tan-yr-Allt, Shelley spent a few weeks in Dublin and Killarney. From Dublin he wrote to the publisher Thomas Hookham of his new poem 'Queen Mab', which should, he instructed, be printed 'on fine paper & so as to catch the aristocrats' whose sons and daughters Shelley hoped to reach ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.361), revealing his abiding and often shrewd concern for audience. Breathing indignation against tyranny in fiercely denunciatory blank verse, and containing eloquent essay-like notes on such subjects as the evils of meat-eating and marriage, 'Queen Mab' shows the youthful radical poet in quintessential form. Shelley decided against publication, but he distributed some seventy copies to individuals. Frequently pirated, the poem was easily the most widely read of Shelley's poems for many years and inspired the Chartists and others. Subtitled 'A Philosophical Poem', the poem displays the range of Shelley's early intellectual interests, and forms something of a compendium of Enlightenment ideas. 'Queen Mab' is especially influenced by the materialism of the 'philosophes'. Preferring the impersonal concept of Necessity to the Christian notion of God, it is pervaded by a vision of existence as dynamic and capable of endless betterment. 
In 1813 Shelley's money problems, which dogged him throughout his life, were acute, involving him, in October, in taking out a 'post-obit' loan of $2000 for $500. A daughter, Eliza Ianthe, was born to Shelley and Harriet in June 1813, but the first evidence of rifts between husband and wife appear in this year, when Shelley writes to Hogg in November that 'I shall return to London alone' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.379-80). In the same year Shelley came to know Mme de Boinville and her daughter Cornelia, with whom he appears to have been briefly in love; Mme de Boinville was the widow of a French soldier who died during the retreat from Moscow in February 1813, and as late as April 1819 Shelley expressed his retrospective admiration for her, partly because of her sympathy for recent French history, as 'the most admirable specimen of a human being I had ever seen' (ibid., 2.92). In 1814 Shelley turned for comfort to Mme de Boinville and Cornelia as his ties with Harriet began to unravel; the domestic unhappiness he was experiencing, especially with regard to the influence exercised by Eliza Westbrook, and the tug of the Boinville household underlie his affecting 'Stanzas. -- April, 1814', a poem whose rhythmic pulse quickens and slows in expressive ways. At the same time his interest in theological polemic resurfaces in his cunningly organized dialogue 'A Refutation of Deism', anonymously published in 1814. Though he remarried Harriet in March to ensure her legal status as his wife, Shelley's emotional restlessness is apparent in his actions and in certain verses. He began to feel, so he later told Hogg, that his marriage had failed, 'as if a dead & living body had been linked together in loathsome & horrible communion' (ibid., 1.402), and in May and June of 1814 he formed a passionate relationship with Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin (1797-1851) ['see 'Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft], his mentor's daughter. After a period of some anguish and self-division, he chose and was chosen by Mary, both these creative geniuses embarking on the most significant relationship of their lives after Mary told Shelley of her love beside the grave of her illustrious mother, Mary Wollstonecraft, in St Pancras churchyard. Shelley spoke to Godwin of their feelings, but Godwin expressed disapproval of the relationship. 
The upshot was Shelley's and Mary's secret elopement to the continent on 28 July. Mary's half-sister Jane (later Claire) Clairmont (1798-1879) accompanied them at Shelley's last minute suggestion, refusing to turn back at Calais, despite the pleas of her mother, the second Mrs Godwin, who had pursued and caught up with the runaways. Thus was fostered a triangular relationship that grew increasingly troubled over the years, and caused Mary, in particular, much distress. However, Shelley developed with Claire an intimate friendship of great importance to him. The three escapees travelled through France (where they witnessed the recent devastation caused by the Napoleonic wars) to Switzerland, and then by river back to Rotterdam, before returning to London. Shelley began 'The Assassins', a fragment of a novel, of interest for its attempt to imagine an ideal community. 
Harriet lamented that Shelley had been seduced by Godwin's daughter and ideas, and had ceased to be the man she loved. Despite Shelley's quixotic offer in a letter from Switzerland that she should still live under his protection, their relations deteriorated over the year. As Harriet struggled to negotiate with Shelley, she received a number of coldly offensive letters from him, best understood as showing on Shelley's part repressed guilt about his decision to abandon his wife and daughter. As in other crises in his life, where Shelley's need to think well of himself was threatened by the possibility that others might criticize his conduct, his response to Harriet was to assert an ideal self-image. But despite his declaration in September 1814 that 'You are plainly lost to me' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1.398), some measure of the messy intricacy of their relations is given by the fact that at the end of November their second child, Charles, was born. Shelley, Mary, and Claire spent the latter half of 1814 in a variety of London lodgings, including 56 Margaret Street, Cavendish Square, 5 Church Terrace, St Pancras, the Cross Keys inn in St John's Street, and 2 Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. Often Shelley was on the run from bailiffs and creditors, able to meet the now pregnant Mary only intermittently. 
Shelley's financial difficulties were temporarily solved after the death of his grandfather Sir Bysshe in January 1815. He immediately took a large apartment at Hans Place in London. Leaving Mary with Hogg, Shelley went with Claire to Field Place for the reading of the will, but he was not permitted to enter the house; he awaited the outcome of the will sitting on the front steps, where he read Milton's 'Comus'. The resulting settlement with his father (finalized in May) gave Shelley a lump sum of $4500 as well as a sum of $2900 to settle outstanding debts (which Shelley did only to a limited extent: unpaid creditors included Thomas Charters, from whom Shelley had ordered a carriage in 1813, and the Nash brothers, moneylenders from whom Shelley borrowed a large sum, also in 1813). By the financial arrangement Shelley also received a yearly allowance of $1000, to be paid quarterly, of which he agreed to give $200 per year to Harriet; he also paid Harriet a sum of $200 to cope with immediate difficulties. Shelley gave Godwin $1000, though that did little to stop the older man's demands for money. 
The opening months of 1815 are harder to reconstruct than most periods in Shelley's life because relevant sections of Mary's (and Shelley's) journals have been destroyed. These sections may have documented his efforts to set up a shared community of friends, in which, in addition to the central relationship between himself and Mary, there would be a close intimacy (possibly sexual) between Mary and Hogg, as well as a tutor-pupil relationship between himself and Claire. Mary's letters to Hogg during this period suggest a flirtation just stopping short of sexual intimacy, and it is to Hogg she wrote for consolation after the death on 6 March of her unnamed baby daughter, who had been born prematurely on 22 February. Mary's relationship with Hogg did not survive long. Her jealousy with regard to Shelley and Claire was longer-lasting and made for difficulties, as it would throughout Shelley's life. As a result Claire temporarily left the Shelley household in May; she returned in the spring of 1816 when she pursued Lord Byron, having a brief affair with him that led to the birth of their daughter, Allegra. 
It is in 1815 that Shelley emerges as a major poet, composing by the end of the year the blank-verse poem 'Alastor', his enigmatic and haunting study of longing, desire, and what in the 'Preface' he calls 'self-centred seclusion' (Reiman and Powers, 69). The poem was partly inspired by a boat trip taken by Shelley, Mary, Peacock, and Charles Clairmont in August up the Thames from Windsor lock (Shelley had rented a house in Bishopsgate, at the edge of Windsor Great Park) to Lechlade, and back again. Shelley's atmospheric and sceptically hopeful lyric 'A Summer Evening Church-Yard' was written at Lechlade, and included in a volume entitled 'Alastor, or, The Spirit of Solitude; and other Poems', published by Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy in February 1816 after Shelley had offered the title poem to John Murray, Byron's publisher. The volume also contained much revised versions of the first two cantos of 'Queen Mab', published under the title 'The Daemon of the World', along with another revised section (entitled 'Superstition') from canto 6. In style and theme 'Alastor' shows the influence of Wordsworth's 'Excursion' (1814) and its portrait of the disillusioned Solitary. While Shelley disliked Wordsworth's reactionary politics (as he saw them), 'Alastor' reveals that he now regarded the question of the poet's role as provoking dilemmas. Furnished with an epigraph from St Augustine about wanting to love while not finding what to love, the poem, in its brooding introspection, is a world away from the explicit radicalism of 'Queen Mab'. 'Alastor' is at some level an elegy for Shelley's failed marriage with Harriet. It gives readers access, however obliquely, to Shelley's deepest feelings about that failure, and its sources in his compulsion to idealize. It sold reasonably well, though the reviews were not especially favourable, giving Shelley his first taste of the relative critical neglect which his published poems encountered during his lifetime. 
In January 1816 Mary and Shelley's son William was born at Bishopsgate. Over the next few months Shelley moved with his family (by now including Claire once more) into several lodging addresses in London: 13 Norfolk Street, 32 Norfolk Street, and 26 Marchmont Street. On 3 May they left for the continent, partly driven to do so by continuing financial problems arising out of the decision by chancery not to allow the arrangement agreed between Shelley and his father the previous year (whereby Shelley would sell to his father the rights of reversion granted him by his grandfather's will). Shelley's party arrived in Paris on 8 May, leaving two days later for Geneva so that Claire could be near Byron; they got there on 13 May, first staying in Secheron, at the Hotel d'Angleterre, where Byron arrived with Dr Polidori in late May. The poets, introduced by Claire, began a major, if sometimes fraught, personal and poetic friendship. Polidori, a somewhat trying presence, found Shelley 'bashful, shy, consumptive' at first meeting, but soon came to view him as 'very clever' (Mullan, 418). Early in June Shelley moved to a small cottage close to Lake Geneva near Cologny, while a few days later Byron took up residence in the Villa Diodati, a rather grander house once lived in by Milton. Shelley and Byron talked and sailed together, making an extended trip round the lake towards the end of June, during which they visited various places made famous by Rousseau's 'La nouvelle Heloise'. Rousseau is the subject of ambivalent stanzas in canto 3 of Byron's 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage', much of which was written in his stay at Geneva, and reflects the influence of Shelley and his advocacy of Wordsworth's poetry. Other works which resulted from this creative summer include Mary's 'Frankenstein', inspired, in part, by Shelley's and Byron's ideas: 'Many and long', she would later write, 'were the conversations between Lord Byron and Shelley to which I was a devout but nearly silent listener' (Holmes, 328). Shelley contributed to the composition of the novel (the manuscript shows substantial additions and corrections in his hand), and the helpfulness of his interventions has been a matter of controversy. Readers can now study the evidence in Charles E. Robinson's facsimile edition; on balance, it is clear that the novel's composition represents another example of the creative collaboration (sometimes involving differences of outlook) that did much to benefit the writing of both the Shelleys. Shelley also secured publication of the novel with Lackington (it appeared in 1818). 
Shelley himself composed relatively little by comparison with Byron, whose productivity often seemed to inhibit his friend. However, he did write two major shorter poems, 'Hymn to Intellectual Beauty', drafted on his boat excursion with Byron, and 'Mont Blanc', written after his visit in late July to Chamonix, finished versions of which were probably left with Byron on Shelley's return to England at the end of August 1816, in a notebook which turned up in 1976 in a trunk belonging to Scrope Berdmore Davies, to whom the notebook was almost certainly entrusted by Byron. This notebook also contains two hitherto unknown sonnets which, to judge from internal evidence, are by Shelley: 'Upon the Wandering Winds that through the Sky' and 'To Laughter'. The versions by which the 'Hymn' and 'Mont Blanc' are usually known derive from their first printings in 1817: the 'Hymn' in 'The Examiner' and 'Mont Blanc' in 'History of a Six Weeks' Tour', an account, largely written by Mary, of both their visits to the continent and containing vividly detailed letters by Shelley to Peacock, describing his experience of visiting Mont Blanc. The poems were Shelley's finest creations to date: the 'Hymn' creates its own secular alternative to traditional Christian worship, but it is alive to the fact that its own faith is built on hope and desire; refusing to find in the sublimity of the Alps evidence of a benevolent deity, 'Mont Blanc' explores the mind's 'imaginings' and the way they can free themselves from politically and spiritually crippling deference to absolutes. Both poems challenge through their style as well as through their meaning. The 'Hymn' is concerned with what lies beyond the senses, and employs an array of comparisons designed to suggest the unstable, fascinating lure of intellectual beauty; 'Mont Blanc' mimics the 'unremitting interchange' between the mind and the external world through an irregular rhyme scheme, purposefully ambiguous syntax, and the deliberate subversion of its own developing structures of understanding. Shelley's stylistic intricacy in many of his poems has been seen as confusion by his detractors; but it is best viewed as an appropriate vehicle for a poet who blends precision and intensity as he presses beyond appearances and seeks to capture dynamic processes of consciousness, history, and the cosmos. It is the style of a sophisticated, self-aware questioner and transformer of supposed reality, and, revealingly, during the visit to Chamonix, Shelley signed himself (in Greek) in the registers of several hotels as 'democrat, great lover of mankind, and atheist' (Bradley, 33), a declaration which, despite Byron's erasure of one such entry, would soon become notorious. 
Shelley returned with his companions to England in September, after visiting Versailles. He had with him a copy of Byron's 'Childe Harold', canto 3, having been commissioned by the author to deliver the manuscript to and arrange terms with the publisher, John Murray, who refused to send proofs to Shelley. Claire, by now pregnant, took lodgings with Mary at 5 Abbey Churchyard, Bath. The rest of the year was shadowed by two suicides: that of Fanny Imlay, Mary's half-sister and daughter of Mary Wollstonecraft and Gilbert Imlay, and that of Harriet Shelley. Fanny Imlay, depressed at being left behind with the Godwins by Shelley, Mary, and Claire, as well as having recently learned that she was illegitimate, overdosed with opium on 9 October in the Mackworth Arms, Swansea. Shelley's 'Her voice did quiver as we parted' captures his distressed feelings about Fanny's death, the circumstances of which Godwin kept secret. 
Tragedy came even closer to home in the next few months. Harriet Shelley was found dead in the Serpentine on 10 December, 'far advanced in pregnancy', as 'The Times' put it (Holmes, 352); she left a heart-rending note, probably written on 7 December, intended for Shelley, her parents, and her sister Eliza, in which she expressed her wish that Ianthe should be brought up by Eliza. Shelley's immediate response to Harriet's death was to deny responsibility and impute blame to the Westbrook family. He was determined to obtain custody of the children, and partly to achieve this end, married Mary on 30 December at St Mildred's Church, Bread Street, London, an event which caused Godwin and his wife much satisfaction, and brought about a reconciliation between Godwin and Shelley. Leigh Hunt, whom Shelley had just met before learning of Harriet's death, and who introduced the younger man to Horace Smith and John Keats, became possibly Shelley's closest friend, and certainly his principal literary ally, partly because of his support at this difficult time. 
The long-term effect on Shelley of Harriet's death was considerable; its full, desolate impact can be felt in the central autobiographical passage of 'Epipsychidion'. Much later, taking exception to W. M. Rossetti's attempts to whitewash Shelley, Claire Clairmont wrote that 'Harriet's suicide had a beneficial effect on Shelley -- he became much less confident in himself and not so wild as he had been before' (Holmes, 356). Peacock, always an advocate of his friend's first wife, reported that Shelley's 'feeling for Harriet's death grew into a deep and abiding sorrow' (ibid., 358). From this time forward, however optimistic Shelley might wish to be, he frequently displayed in his writing an awareness of guilt, painful memory, and remorse that suggests first-hand knowledge. 
Much of Shelley's energies in the months after Harriet's suicide went into the attempt to gain custody of their children. In this he was opposed by the Westbrook family, and the case came before Lord Eldon, the lord chancellor, who in a celebrated decision ruled on 27 March 1817 that neither Shelley nor the Westbrooks should have custody. Eldon decided against Shelley on the grounds that the latter's 'principles' would lead to the recommendation of 'conduct' that was 'immoral and vicious' (Blunden, 138). The children were put in the care of a Dr and Mrs Hume, at Shelley's suggestion. Shelley's bitterness at the decision finds its way into a number of poems, principally his complex cursing of Eldon in 'To the Lord Chancellor'. Children were a crucial part of Shelley's life in 1817. On 12 January Claire Clairmont gave birth to Allegra, and on 2 September he and Mary had a daughter, Clara Everina. Shelley's attempts over the next few years to provide for Claire and Allegra and to interest Byron in his daughter's welfare show him at his most tactful and prepossessing, even though they exposed him to scandal about his relations with Claire. Disaster ensued later in Italy after Shelley had returned Allegra to Byron in 1818; in 1822 the girl died of typhoid in a convent in Bagnacavallo. 
Awaiting the chancery decision, Shelley and Mary spent much time with the Hunts at their house in Hampstead, where they met Hunt's circle. Only Horace Smith, a banker and writer of parodic verses, took a warm liking to Shelley, providing a vivid picture of Shelley's manner ('it was impossible to doubt even for a moment that you were gazing upon a 'gentleman'' (Blunden, 145)). William Hazlitt found him 'sanguine-complexioned, and shrill-voiced' and thought him too much 'the philosophic fanatic' (ibid., 143). Keats, according to Hunt, 'did not take to Shelley as kindly as Shelley did to him' (ibid., 142), probably feeling that Smith's 'gentleman' was a little too persuaded of his social distinction. Benjamin Robert Haydon, the painter, quarrelled with Shelley when the poet began 'saying in the most feminine and gentle voice, 'As to that detestable religion, the Christian...'' (ibid., 143). 
Provoking as Shelley could no doubt be, his desire to change minds acted as a creative spur throughout a year of social unrest and clamour for political reform. In March, just before Shelley moved into Albion House in Marlow, Charles and James Ollier published his pamphlet 'A Proposal for Putting Reform to the Vote throughout the Kingdom'. In this work Shelley seeks to promote a gradualist approach to 'beneficial innovations' such as reform of parliament, declaring 'Universal Suffrage' to be, at present, 'a measure fraught with peril' ('Prose Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 175). Throughout Shelley's career, the tension between his radical visions and his readiness to support step-by-step reforms, along with his awareness of what elsewhere he calls 'the difficult and unbending realities of actual life' (Clark, 254), gave a satisfying complexity to his political utopianism. Later in the year, also using the pseudonym of the 'Hermit of Marlow', Shelley produced his most vigorous and sardonic piece of political prose, 'An Address to the People on the Death of the Princess Charlotte', in which he laments the death, not of the princess, but of Liberty as a result of the execution of three labourers involved in the abortive Pentridge revolution; the pamphlet, of which only a few copies were printed, concludes with an imagining of some 'glorious Phantom' (Liberty reborn) ('Prose Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 239), which anticipates the close of a later response to political repression, the sonnet 'England in 1819'. Other major prose works probably written this year include fragments of the so-called 'Speculations on metaphysics' (first published by Mary Shelley in 1840) and the fascinating if unfinished 'Essay on Christianity' (first published by Lady Shelley in her 'Shelley Memorials' in 1859), altogether a more thoughtful and inward reading of that religion than is supplied by 'Queen Mab'. Here Shelley offers a mainly, but not solely, humanist account of God, suggests that the notion of life after death is a delightful fiction, and praises the teachings of Christ, which are glossed in a way that sounds distinctly Shelleyan. 
But the main project of 1817 was Shelley's latter-day epic poem, written in Spenserian stanzas, 'Laon and Cythna', published by Ollier, with Sherwood, Neely, and Jones, in December 1817. Retitled 'The Revolt of Islam', the work was republished the next month in censored form, after Shelley had reluctantly agreed to cut overtly anti-Christian phrases and references to an incestuous relation between the hero and heroine. Shelley described the poem in his 'Preface' as 'an experiment on the temper of the public mind' (T. Hutchinson, ed., 'Shelley: Poetical Works', corr. G. M. Matthews, 1970, 32). Yet, for all its beauty of versification and power of thought, the poem was too cloudily symbolic and abstractly anti-establishment to be popular. The 'Quarterly Review' ran a particularly sharp and hostile piece on the poem. The reviewer was J. T. Coleridge, but Shelley suspected Southey, a suspicion which led in 1820 to a bitter exchange of letters between the two poets. 'The Revolt of Islam' contains in its 'Preface' and its dedicatory stanzas to Mary passages of idealized poetic autobiography, in which Shelley presents himself as the mouthpiece for 'Truth's Deathless Voice'. Much of the poem concerns itself with replaying the French Revolution and depicting Laon and Cythna as heroic revolutionary figures. The fact that the two central figures go to a post-mortal 'Temple of the Spirit' after the failure of the revolution indicates the poem's enriching awareness that its political and spiritual goals are hard to achieve. 
On 11 March 1818 Shelley left England for Italy, never to return. His departure was motivated by financial and health problems (including a recent bout of ophthalmia, possibly the result of visiting the poor in Marlow), as well as by the wish to hand over Allegra to Byron, the fear that after Lord Eldon's judgment he might lose the children he had with Mary, and an increasing sense of alienation from English society and culture. His early response to 'the loveliness of the earth & the serenity of the sky' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.3) gives a foretaste of how his poetic gifts flourished in response to the landscape and artistic heritage of Italy. At the Casa Bertini in the Bagni di Lucca, where Shelley and his party stayed from June to August, he translated Plato's 'Symposium' in ten days. Shelley's gifts as a translator were remarkable, as 'The Cyclops', his expert version of Euripides' work, bears witness. His elegant translation of the 'Symposium' indicates the growing importance of the Greek philosopher for Shelley's thinking; Plato's ideas and images pervade Shelley's Italian productions, though Shelley is too sceptical about ultimate truth ever to be a Platonist in any strict philosophical sense. About this time he wrote his brief but important essay 'On love' and his 'Discourse on the Manners of the Antient Greeks Relative to the Subject of Love' (not published in full until 1931). In August he finished 'Rosalind and Helen', a poem begun the previous year, and published in the spring of 1819; it is a minor by-product of 'Laon and Cythna', most interesting for its presentation of the poet figure, Lionel. 
Prompted, in part, by Claire's anxieties about Allegra, Shelley renewed his acquaintance with Byron in Venice in late August. Their conversations and disagreements about human destiny found their way into 'Julian and Maddalo' (first published in 1824), which was finished in August 1819, another of Shelley's masterpieces that both incites and frustrates biographical speculation. The poem's couplets accommodate a range of inflections, and its two main characters, the optimistic Julian and the pessimistic Maddalo, overhear at the poem's centre a disturbed and disturbing speech by a Maniac who has been disappointed in love. Shelley's marital problems may find covert expression in this section of the poem. It is likely that there was strain between him and Mary following the death of their daughter Clara in September 1818 after Mary had undertaken, at Shelley's instructions, a long journey in the Italian heat from Este to Padua. More anguish followed in June 1819, when their much-loved son William died, plunging Mary into profound melancholia and creating a distance and tension between her and Shelley which shadowed their marriage henceforth. In between these tragic deaths occurred the mysterious episode of Shelley's 'Neapolitan charge' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.211). A girl, born on 27 December 1818, was registered as 'Elena Adelaide Shelley'. Despite the later blackmailing allegations of an Italian servant, Paolo Foggi, it is unlikely that Claire was the mother; the view that the Shelleys' Swiss servant Elise (later Foggi's wife, her maiden name is unknown) was the mother is sometimes expressed; some biographers see Shelley as the likely father, but there is no proof of this. The child was left in Naples with foster parents after Shelley left. She died in the summer of 1820, an event that produced in the poet a morbid sense that 'the destruction that is consuming me' was like 'an atmosphere which wrapt & infected everything connected with me' (ibid.). The pressures endured by Shelley at the close of 1818 are turned into lyric art in his 'Stanzas Written in Dejection'. Personal and political dejection also mark his fine 'Lines Written among the Euganean Hills', a reworking of the eighteenth-century prospect poem, begun at Este in October and included in the 'Rosalind and Helen' volume; the poem records what Shelley in the volume's 'Advertisement' calls 'the sudden relief of a state of deep despondency' (T. Hutchinson, ed., 'Shelley: Poetical Works', corr. G. M. Matthews, 1970, 167), and it concludes with a brief imagining of happiness and peace. 
Shelley's creative resilience in the face of personal suffering is remarkable. In 1819 he wrote many of the works by which he is best known. His responsiveness to Italian landscapes, history, and art, recorded in some majestic letters written to Peacock, is especially acute around this period. In January 1819 he visited Pompeii, in February Paestum, and in March he arrived in Rome, experiences which would leave deep impressions on his imagination. These impressions were not always radiant. In 'Prometheus Unbound', II. iv, Shelley seems to draw an image of the 'great chain' of evil from his sight in the square of St Peter's of '300 fettered criminals at work' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.93). Indeed, 1819 is a year in which Shelley's career-long belief in the need to: '
hope, till Hope creates 

From its own wreck the thing it contemplates 
('Prometheus Unbound', IV. 573-4)' receives severe tests as well as eloquent reaffirmation. 'Prometheus Unbound' was largely written in this year (it was begun at Este in 1818 and was published by Ollier with some shorter poems in August 1820). 
The work represents, in its allusive sophistication, multiplicity of imaginative suggestions, generic complexity (it is a 'lyrical drama'), and richness of invention, Shelley's most ambitious attempt to 'familiarise the highly refined imagination' of his readers 'with beautiful idealisms of moral excellence', as he puts it in his 'Preface' (Reiman and Powers, 135). But it is a mark of his readiness to take a full look at the worst that while or, in the case of 'Athanase', in the months before, he was working on the lyrical drama he also composed at least five substantial works exploring darker aspects of the human condition: in addition to 'Julian and Maddalo' and 'Lines Written among the Euganean Hills', these works include 'Athanase' (first published in 1824), in which Shelley presents a condition of unexplained dejection; 'The Cenci' (first published in 1819), a gripping drama that centres on the ethics of revenge, which was turned down by the major London theatres because of the incestuous rape at its heart; and 'The Mask of Anarchy', a satirical yet visionary ballad, written in response to the infamous Peterloo massacre that took place in Manchester in August. Like many of Shelley's most uncompromising works, 'The Mask of Anarchy', which settles scores with members of the Liverpool administration such as Castlereagh and Eldon, was published only after Shelley's death (in 1832 by Leigh Hunt, to whom it had been sent by Shelley, who hoped that his friend might publish the poem in his literary and political paper, 'The Examiner'). 'The Cenci' made it into a second edition (published in 1821), the only work of Shelley's to do so in his lifetime. Its relative popularity derived, in part, from its readiness to deal with believable characters in an austere blank verse unburdened by what in his 'Preface' Shelley says is 'commonly called mere poetry' (ibid., 241). John Scott's review of the work was reasonably typical: he disapproved of its 'radical foulness of moral complexion', but he complimented its 'uncommon force of poetical sentiment' (O'Neill, 97). 
The year 1819, in many ways Shelley's 'annus mirabilis', saw him (and his party) moving round Italy. He stayed in Rome until just after the death of his son, then he moved to the Villa Valsovano between Leghorn and Monte Nero; in October he switched to the via Valfonda in Florence. While he was in Rome his portrait was painted by Amelia Curran, daughter of the Irish nationalist and acquaintance of Shelley John Philpott Curran. This portrait, the best-known picture of Shelley, was regarded as 'ill done' by the artist herself, who had been on the point of burning it when it was sent for by Mary Shelley after her husband's death (Holmes, 512). It offers a sentimentalized picture of the poet as a boyish angel, but, in fairness, Medwin could 'conceive of no one so difficult to pourtray' on account of Shelley's 'ever flitting and varied' expression (Woof, 92). Most contemporary descriptions note his height (5 feet 10 or 11 inches), slight stoop, prematurely grey hair (associated by Shelley, it would appear from a passage in 'Epipsychidion', with a bout of venereal disease), slimness, brilliant eyes, small nose, pointed chin, and fair complexion. Leigh Hunt remarks on 'the sensitiveness and tremulous firmness of the mouth' (ibid., 92). 
While living in Florence, at the Palazzo Marini, 4395 via Valfonda, Shelley wrote his greatest shorter poem, 'Ode to the West Wind', in which prosodic brilliance (each section is a sonnet in 'terza rima' with a concluding couplet), metaphorical daring, and poignant feeling combine to create an enduring record of his desire to 'scatter' his 'words among mankind'. During this time he also wrote 'Peter Bell the Third' (not published until 1839), a poem that again demonstrates Shelley's underestimated capacity to write with penetrating and subtle wit as it mocks Wordsworth's 'dullness' yet shows admiration for his achievement. Shelley hoped to publish a series of ''popular songs' wholly political' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.191) as a separate volume, but he could not persuade his publishing contacts in England (principally Leigh Hunt) to help these often inflammatory works into print at a time of increasing political repression. Also fated not to be published until many years after his death was a long, unfinished prose treatise, 'A Philosophical View of Reform', which he began in November 1819, a work which sets out in detail Shelley's mature political views, and illustrates both his awareness that change is a complicated process and that change for the better is unremittingly to be pursued. A further piece of political prose written about this time -- and also unpublished during his life -- is his letter to 'The Examiner' protesting about the sentencing to three years' imprisonment of Richard Carlile on a charge of blasphemous libel. Here Shelley shows a capacity for witty polemic that is apparent, too, in his subsequent essay 'On the devil, and devils' (written between late 1819 and June 1820). In the midst of this furious literary activity Mary gave birth to a son, Percy Florence, on 12 November. Shelley and Mary were visited by Sophia Stacey, a ward of the poet's uncle Robert Parker, and a friendship briefly blossomed. Stacey had a good singing voice, and she was the recipient of a number of lyrics written for her by the poet, including 'Thou art fair, and few are fairer' and a version of the impassioned, virtuosic poem variously known as 'The Indian Serenade' and 'An Indian Girl's Song' (this poem may also have been given as a gift to Jane Williams, the common-law wife of Edward Ellerker Williams, in 1821). 
Sophia Stacey left for Rome on 29 December, and the Shelleys themselves left for Pisa on 26 January 1820. As always, Shelley followed public events with keen interest: the stirrings of revolt in Spain in January prompted his 'Ode to Liberty', which sets the Spanish revolt in the context of the battle for freedom throughout history. Much of the poem, therefore, feels like a rhapsodic versifying of 'A Philosophical View of Reform' and confirms Shelley's ease among poetic genres and modes, yet its intricacy extends beyond its syntax and rhyming; at the close, the prophetic 'song, its pinions disarrayed of might, / Drooped' is an example of Shelley's fondness for staging uncertainty that inspiration will last. Along with 'Ode to the West Wind', 'The Sensitive Plant', 'The Cloud', 'To a Sky-Lark', and some other lyrics, 'Ode to Liberty' was published in the 'Prometheus Unbound' volume later in the year. The lyrical drama was the major work in the volume, but the accompanying pieces include some of Shelley's best work. 'The Sensitive Plant' is a subtle fable about beauty and transience. It hopes against hope that since our senses may play us false, our cherished ideals may be true. In 'The Cloud' celebration of the natural becomes, in the context of the volume, libertarian affirmation: 'I change, but I cannot die'. Unfortunately, despite Shelley's requests to Ollier that he be sent 'the 'revised' sheets' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.178), he did not receive proofs of the volume; the result was that the title-poem, in particular, was printed full of errors. Modern editors are still trying to track down how many. The volume received a perceptive though qualified review by John Lockhart in 'Blackwood's', but it did not sell well. 
In 1820 the Shelleys were a good deal in contact with Maria and John Gisborne. Maria's son from an earlier marriage, Henry Reveley, was another of those to whom Shelley lent money he could ill afford: in this case, to build a steamboat to run between Leghorn, Genoa, and Marseilles. The scheme failed, but one positive result of the friendship was Shelley's affectionate, amusing, and revealing 'Letter to Maria Gisborne' (first published in 1824), which he wrote in June after he had moved to Leghorn to live in the Gisbornes' house, the owners having gone to London for a few months. At the heart of this epistle are shrewd and thoughtful portraits of Godwin, Coleridge, Hunt, Hogg, and Peacock. Godwin, who had been badgering Shelley for money, is seen as 'fallen', and yet assured of fame 'Before the dread tribunal of 'to come''. In July Shelley translated the Homeric 'Hymn to Mercury', written in 'ottava rima', and, in its delight in the god's prankster-like high spirits, a dry run for 'The Witch of Atlas', composed in a few days in August after the Shelleys had moved to the Baths of San Giuliano, near Pisa. 'The Witch of Atlas' displays a fine-spun, ethereal myth making and a tone of lawless shape changing. Avoiding polemic, it succeeds in opposing the authoritarian and orthodox less through statement than style. Yet, as often in Shelley's later work, 'a shadow tracks [its] flight of fire', to borrow a line from 'The Two Spirits: an Allegory', since the Witch's aloofness from human sorrow reminds the reader, by contrast, of what, in his 'Dedication' to 'The Cenci', Shelley calls 'sad reality' (Reiman and Powers, 237). About this time Shelley wrote 'Swellfoot the Tyrant', a mock-Aristophanic work that responds wittily to the Queen Caroline affair, exploiting the conventions of radical satire to indict the Liverpool government and envisage revolutionary change when Liberty makes common cause with Famine: the work was published by J. Johnston in December but immediately suppressed at the insistence of the Society for the Suppression of Vice. Another poem also responding to political turmoil is the impassioned if highly rhetorical 'Ode to Naples', written in the latter half of August. 
The 'Ode' is typical of Shelley's later work in its occasional nature, as though, after various critical buffetings, he needed to be spurred into verse by some specific event or fact. Certainly some of his finest work from this time forward originates in its response to such stimuli, even as his letters begin to brood on his sense that he was, 'speaking literarily, infirm of purpose' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.244). At the end of October Shelley moved back to Pisa; he met a beautiful, young woman, Teresa Viviani (1801-1836), who was being kept in a convent awaiting the outcome of marriage arrangements in which she played little part. Once again, Shelley was fired by the wish to save a young woman in distress, as he had been with his first wife; once again, disenchantment was the consequence. 
Shelley's final year and a half show him writing at the height of his powers, though often out of the depth of tangled feelings. Some of his most evidently personal poetry is written in these months, including -- and especially -- a series of lyric poems composed for Jane Williams. Jane and Edward arrived in Pisa in January 1821, attracted by what they had heard about Shelley from Medwin, who had been staying with the Shelleys since October 1820. Shelley's feelings for Jane are hard to assess accurately. They lie somewhere between friendship and love, and are, indeed, the overt subject of exploration in poems remarkable for a note that many critics have recognized as new: a note at once serene and frustrated, saddened and accepting, submitting to, perhaps even glad of, constraint, yet constantly if undemonstratively lamenting the gap between the human lot and '
some world far from ours, 

Where music and moonlight and feeling 

Are one. 

' These poems, a late letter to John Gisborne ('I only feel the want of those who can feel, and understand me... Mary does not' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.435)), and the central section of 'Epipsychidion' indicate the growing difficulties Shelley was experiencing in his marriage with Mary Shelley. It should be said, however, that the marriage also seems at its maturest and most real in these months. The bond that kept husband and wife together may have sometimes felt like a chain, as in 'The Magnetic Lady to her Patient', but it was forged in the fires of shared trials, suffering, and creative interaction. 

'Epipsychidion' was the one major poem that Mary printed without an additional note in her great editions of 1839 -- and one can see why. In it, she plays a secondary role as 'The cold chaste Moon', forgotten altogether in the final 'invitation au voyage' addressed to Viviani. That in the poem itself, and subsequently, Shelley recognized the desirability and impossibility of his fantasized 'Italian platonics' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 1.223), as Mary called them, suggests the centrality of 'Epipsychidion' in any account of him as a poet of idealist desire. Shelley adapts Plato's and Dante's accounts of love in the 'Symposium' and the 'Vita nuova', respectively, to his own highly individual explorations; the result is a masterpiece that can still disconcert as its couplets waver unstably and yet valuably between the spiritual and the sexual, the allegorical and the literal, the erotic and the political, devotion to one figure and advocacy of free love. Shelley first suggested a printing of 100 copies for the 'esoteric few' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.263), then asked Ollier to withdraw it from circulation. 
In the aftermath of writing 'Epipsychidion' Shelley composed 'A Defence of Poetry', his eloquent answer to Peacock's satirical 'Four ages of poetry'. 'A Defence of Poetry', sent to Ollier on 20 March though unpublished until Mary Shelley's 'Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments' (1840 [1839]), contends that poetry is useful because it develops the imaginative powers of its readers. 'The great instrument of moral good', he writes, balancing the aesthetic and the ethical, 'is the imagination; and poetry administers to the effect by acting upon the cause' (Reiman and Powers, 488). As much a radiant prose-poem as critical treatise, the essay's implications are still being teased out by commentators. Typically, Shelley argues for an association between periods of political reform and great poetry, yet refrains from urging a causal link. The essay celebrates imaginative creativity above analytical reasoning, and reveals the poet's break with the Enlightenment reasoning on which his early work had depended. There are manifest links in phrasing and conceptualizing between 'A Defence of Poetry', 'Epipsychidion', and 'Adonais', Shelley's elegy for John Keats who had died in Rome in February 1821. In this work Shelley, who subscribed to the belief that Keats's fatal illness had been brought on by a bad review in the 'Quarterly Review', produced his most exalted vision of the significance of poets and poetry. Yet, giving poignancy to his praise for 'The splendours of the firmament of time' is his desire to leave behind 'the contagion of the world's slow stain'. Sometimes criticized as promoting an insipid image of Keats, 'Adonais', in fact, pays tribute to the achievement of a writer whose recent productions -- especially 'Hyperion' -- were much admired by Shelley, always a perceptive and generous critic of his contemporaries. The elegy was printed in Pisa, so that Shelley could oversee the publishing process. A copy was sent to John Gisborne on 13 July, while others were given to Ollier for distribution. Ollier did distribute those copies Shelley sent to him, but he did not republish the poem; indeed, Ollier was irksomely unco-operative over the winter of 1821-2, leading Shelley to search, unsuccessfully, for an alternative publisher. 
Over the last few months of his life Shelley was engaged in a number of projects, including a play, 'Charles the First', of which a good deal of drafted material remains. His notebooks of the period bear witness to his work on translations (especially Goethe's 'Faust'), lyrics, and other projects, despite his increasingly insistent emphasis in letters on his loss of inspiration (accompanied by admiration for the prolific output of and success enjoyed by Byron, who had moved to Pisa in November 1821). Shelley's final published work 'Hellas', another 'lyrical drama', was composed in October 1821 and appeared in the first few months of 1822. It was sparked into being by Shelley's support for the Greeks in the War of Greek Independence which had broken out in April 1821; the poem, which Shelley called 'a mere improvise' ('Preface'), is dedicated to Prince Alexander Mavrocordato, later to become prime minister of Greece after independence, a friend of the Shelleys and the leading figure in a group of Greek exiles living in Pisa. Though the poem is partisan, it sets the struggle for Greek independence in vast historical and metaphysical contexts. Modelled on Aeschylus's 'The Persians', 'Hellas' concentrates on the figure of a doomed tyrant, here Mahmoud, who, in dialogue with the sage Ahasuerus, is brought to a recognition of the futility of his power and of the supremacy of thought. The choral lyrics elaborate these ideas with musical sophistication. 
Towards the end of April 1822 Shelley, anxious to move away from close proximity with Byron, moved with his family and that of Edward and Jane Williams to San Terenzo near Lerici in the Bay of Spezia, where the two families shared a house, the Casa Magni, a converted boathouse directly giving on to the sea. With Williams Shelley sailed in his new boat (which to his annoyance came from Genoa with the words 'Don Juan' painted on the forward mainsail: Shelley insisted that the offending sections of sail be cut out and replaced). He also worked on his last major work, 'The Triumph of Life', which was left unfinished at his death, just after the poem's narrator has asked the question near the centre of Shelley's poetry: 'Then, what is Life?' Despite its incomplete, much cancelled state, 'The Triumph of Life', a Romantic reworking of Dante and Petrarch, shows a creative intensity, a precision, and an inventiveness that are at odds with the seeming pessimism of its content: a visionary depiction of the nightmare of history and the failure of idealistic hope. Its overall mood turns out to be less disillusioned than relentlessly questioning, in common with Shelley's assertion in a late letter, 'Let us see the truth whatever that may be' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.442). 
The last weeks of Shelley's life were a turbulent mixture of pleasure in the beauty of nature and the companionship of Jane Williams, domestic problems, including a near-fatal miscarriage suffered by Mary on 16 June (Shelley saved her life by making her sit in a hip-bath full of ice to stop the bleeding), hallucinations, and troubled dreams. In a letter written just after Shelley's death, Mary recounts a number of such dreams and hallucinations: they include Shelley's nightmare that 'the sea was rushing in' and that 'he saw the figure of himself strangling me [that is, Mary]', and a waking vision he experienced of meeting his double 'which met him as he walked on the terrace & said to him -- 'How long do you mean to be content?'' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 1.245). Together with the emotional and creative stresses Shelley was evidently experiencing in San Terenzo, he expresses an affecting reluctance to think too far ahead into the future, feeling, in his own words, as though he stood 'upon a precipice..., content if the heaven above me is calm for the passing moment' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.436). One plan he did throw himself into was the setting up, with Leigh Hunt and Byron, of the anti-establishment journal 'The Liberal'. Hunt came to Italy to participate in this venture. On 1 July Shelley and Williams sailed to Leghorn to meet Hunt and his family whom they accompanied to Pisa. On 8 July Shelley, Williams, and Charles Vivian (a young sailor) began their return voyage to San Terenzo. A squall arose; the 'Don Juan' sank accidentally (the suicide theory occasionally proffered is dubious); Shelley and Williams drowned, Shelley's body being washed ashore on 18 July near Viareggio. A month later, on 16 August 1822, exhumed from the sands where they were buried in quicklime, the bodies of Shelley and Williams were cremated near Viareggio in a scene described by Edward John Trelawny, the lively biographer of Shelley's last months. 
Trelawny's account (revised several times by him) of the discovery of Shelley's body (a 'volume of Sophocles in one pocket, and Keats's poems in the other, doubled back' (Hogg, 2.217)) and of its cremation in a 'furnace' he had obtained in Leghorn (ibid., 2.220) may not be wholly trustworthy in its details. Doubt has been cast on the assertion that the organ snatched by Trelawny from the pyre and later quarrelled over by Hunt and Mary before being stored lovingly by the latter really was the poet's heart; it might, so a Mr A. S. Bicknell suggested to 'The Athenaeum' in 1885, have been the poet's liver, an organ more likely to resist fire than the heart. But Trelawny, who evokes the sickened response of Byron, renders memorably a quasi-symbolic collision between the imaginative (Shelley's 'spirit soaring over us') and the corporeal ('The corpse fell open and the heart was laid bare' (ibid., 2.223)). Trelawny collected the poet's ashes and subsequently placed them in 1823 in the protestant cemetery in Rome, where Keats and William Shelley were also buried. 
In Pisa before his death Shelley told Marianne Hunt, 'If I die tomorrow I have lived to be older than my father, I am ninety years of age' (Barker-Benfield, 190). The remark suggests the amount of experience he got through in his short life. Above all, this experience includes an astonishing intensity of intellectual and poetic activity. It has taken generations of critics and scholars a long time to come close to defining satisfactorily his wide-ranging achievement. As Shelley himself asserted in 'A Defence of Poetry', probably with his own case in mind, 'the jury which sits in judgement upon a poet, belonging as he does to all time, must be composed of his peers: it must be impannelled from the selectest of the wise of many generations' (Reiman and Powers, 486). 
In the face of opposition from Sir Timothy, Shelley's father, Mary Shelley worked heroically to bring his work to public attention, and all readers of the poet are indebted to her impressive, if inevitably imperfect, editorial and critical labours. In understandable reaction against those who derided Shelley's poetry because they disliked his atheism and unconventional private life, she offered a version of Shelley in her 'Notes' to her 1839 editions of the poems that is undeniably idealized. At the same time her comments on Shelley's poetic achievement in such works as 'The Cenci' (a favourite of hers), and on his intellectual development, are always thought-provoking and often persuasive. The beginnings of a cult of Shelley are apparent in Mary's 'Notes', as well as in poetic tributes from the likes of Thomas Lovell Beddoes and Robert Browning (in 'Pauline', published in 1833); this cult took on more sentimental and full-blown form when custody of the poet's papers and reputation passed to Mary's son Percy Florence and his wife, Jane, Lady Shelley, who created at Boscombe Manor a virtual shrine to the poet's memory. Potentially disagreeable aspects of or opinions about the poet's life could not be wholly suppressed, however, as Lady Shelley discovered when she inadvisedly commissioned Hogg to write his life of Shelley, still influential: the portrayal of Shelley in recent works such as Ken Russell's film 'Gothic' as a frantic visionary owes much to the representations of Hogg and others. 
Despite the setting up of a Shelley Society in 1886 and the transformation of the poet in the eyes of some into a martyr at the hands of an uncaring and philistine world (a view given iconic form in the grandiose sculpture of Shelley by Onslow Ford installed in 1893 in the Oxford college that had expelled him), dislike of Shelley, often focusing on his treatment of his first wife, was articulated throughout the nineteenth century and beyond. Matthew Arnold's response to Edward Dowden's biography (1886) -- the first major attempt to see Shelley plain -- was to exclaim in disgust, 'that set!' (Norman, 235): Shelley's capacity to induce moral revulsion was as strong posthumously as it had been during his life. Indeed, seeing Shelley steadily and seeing him whole has always been difficult -- and, one is tempted to say, always will be. How to combine the political radical and the lyrical or imaginative poet has continually exercised readers of the poet. In their different ways, Mary Shelley and Leigh Hunt, two of the poet's most intelligent advocates, felt under pressure to represent Shelley's radicalism in terms that would be thought acceptable by the readership which they were seeking to create for the poetry. Certainly later Victorian critics (Francis Thompson is a notable example) concentrated on the lyric beauty of the poet's writing at the expense of his engagement with history and politics. 
Nor, until recently, has Shelley's poetic reputation ever been secure. Early on, his idealism and figurative complexity earned the adverse criticism of Hazlitt. In 1881 Matthew Arnold dismissed him as a 'beautiful and ineffectual angel', 'beating in the void his luminous wings in vain' (Swinden, 69). In the first half of the twentieth century Shelley's reputation suffered a sharply downwards plunge, as his poetry fell foul of modernist tenets of figurative concreteness and impersonality. His writing received partial and unjust verdicts from T. S. Eliot, who found that the man -- 'humourless, pedantic, self-centred and sometimes almost a blackguard' (ibid., 71) -- obtruded on the poetry, and F. R. Leavis, who excoriated a supposedly 'weak grasp upon the actual' ('Revaluation', 1936, 194). In a period dominated by 'new criticism', with its attention to words on the page, Shelley's linguistic subtleties were largely -- and bafflingly -- ignored. Since the 1960s, however, Shelley's critical fortunes have soared thanks to rigorous attention to his intellectual complexity and poetic subtlety and integrity, and to the daunting task (spearheaded by scholars such as Donald H. Reiman, G. M. Matthews, Timothy Webb, E. B. Murray, and Kelvin Everest) of producing the best possible texts of his works. His concern with politics has received due and thoughtful recognition. That said, Shelley the political radical can be simplified and stereotyped as well as downplayed, and late-twentieth-century delight in a 'Red Shelley' (the phrase is Paul Foot's) can be as misleading as the Victorian image of him as transcending topical issues; recent literary treatment of Shelley, as in Howard Brenton's play, 'Bloody Poetry' (1985), often seems close to caricature. But the quality of critical and editorial work on Shelley has reached a new pitch of understanding. Clearly, Shelley's best modern critics recognize the applicability to his own work of his view in 'A Defence of Poetry' that 'All high poetry is infinite', 'the source', for succeeding generations of readers, 'of an unforeseen and an unconceived delight' (Reiman and Powers, 500). 


@@@@@


doc= 25313


Shelley, Sir Richard (c.1513-1587), diplomat and prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England, was the second son of the judge Sir William Shelley (1478/9-1549) and Alice Belknap (died 1536), both of Sussex. Richard Shelley followed others of his family by joining the knights of St John (the hospitallers, or knights of Malta). In the mid-1530s he went to the continent to round off his education, and in 1539, wearied of study, took his first steps on a diplomatic career, accompanying the Venetian ambassador on a mission to the Turkish court in the hope of gaining firsthand knowledge to employ in Henry VIII's service. The expedition to Turkey was arduous, but the experience does seem to have helped equip him for his chosen career, and by at least January 1541, though he had protested against Henry VIII's suppression of the hospitallers in England in 1540, he was a recognized member of the diplomatic corps, receiving expenses in 1546 as a member of the English mission in France. 
Shelley was now acquiring a reputation as a suave diplomat and able linguist, so much so that in October 1550 he was mentioned as a possible special commissioner to unblock deadlocked negotiations with the French over the boundaries of the recent English conquest at Boulogne. At some point Henry VIII seems to have employed him in Germany. In November 1551 he was chosen for the special task of escorting Mary of Guise, the widow of the Scottish king James V, through the English part of a journey from France to Scotland. In March the following year, 'an honest gentleman... who speaks several languages', though reputed to be 'of the new religion' ('CSP Spain', 1550-52, 468, 494), Shelley was selected as ambassador at the court of the emperor Charles V, and in January 1554 he reported his interview in Vienna with Charles's brother, Ferdinand, king of the Romans, in which, shown signal marks of favour, he discussed Anglo-Habsburg friendship and royal marriage proposals. 
Accomplished diplomat though he clearly was, Shelley must have needed to summon up all his skills as an emissary in July 1553, when he had to reassure Charles V, always highly protective of his family's welfare, of the safety of the emperor's cousin, Mary Tudor, briefly set aside in the succession to the throne by the accession of Lady Jane Grey. Following Mary's seizure of the throne in August, Shelley faced, in January 1554, the doubtless more agreeable task of formally announcing to the emperor the marriage to Charles's son Philip of 'the Queen, his mistress' ('CSP Spain', 1553, 479). His role as a courtier-diplomat was fully evident late in 1555 when, as a gentleman of the household who in April had been granted an annual income of $50 for life, he was deputed to convey formally to the Portuguese royal family and the regent of Spain the news of the queen's confinement, paying his respects to the king of France 'en route'. 
In point of fact Shelley's ambassadorial career, clearly blossoming up to this point, was interrupted when Mary restored to him his membership of the knights of St John by re-establishing the hospitallers in England in April 1557. He was appointed turcopolier, or commander of the light infantry of the knights, a post traditionally reserved to Englishmen, and made commander of the preceptory (or religious house) of Slebech (Pembrokeshire) and Halston (Shropshire). Following Mary's death in November 1558 and her succession by the protestant Elizabeth, Shelley, who was on his way to Malta, the knights' headquarters, adopted an unmistakably Catholic stance. Though there was a possibility of his resuming his diplomatic career under Elizabeth, in the 1560s his fortunes became caught up with those of the knights, and in September 1561 he succeeded Thomas Tresham as grand prior. Now an exile in the world of Catholic Europe, Shelley, if he was to return to work as an envoy, would do so under the aegis of Philip II of Spain, who sent him on a mission to congratulate the new king of the Romans in 1562. It was from Madrid that Shelley wrote, in June 1565, to the secretary of state, William Cecil, advising the adoption of a moderate course in religion in England, giving notice of his own imminent departure for Malta, hoping to resume his services for his country, but otherwise resigning himself to a Catholic retirement with his 'Book & Beads' ('Catalogue of the Harleian Manuscripts in the British Museum', 2.465, no. 6990, 31). His intention in July 1565 of playing his part in opposing the great, but ultimately unsuccessful, Turkish siege of Malta was stalled at Naples, though Shelley did eventually reach the island, even if disputes with the grand master led to his withdrawal at the end of the 1560s. 
The final phase of Shelley's life now opened, in Venice, at the invitation of the government of that republic. There, in April 1574, he was noted by Philip Sidney as 'very much devoted to papist superstitions' (Pears, 'Correspondence of Sir Philip Sidney', 50). In July of the same year, though ill, he journeyed on to Prague and Hamburg, but by June 1575 he was evidently back in Venice. From there a long series of letters home, written in the 1570s and 1580s to the queen and to the secretary of state, Sir Francis Walsingham, shows that he acted as a semi-official, unpaid, commercial representative of English merchants' fiscal concerns. In this correspondence he vehemently protested both his loyalty to the queen (involving the refusal of a Spanish pension), and his unbudging Catholicism: in February 1576 he was in Rome, where he was identified as opposed to the militant Catholic strategy of Cardinal William Allen. Shelley grew increasingly desperate to return home and begged Walsingham to allow him to do so, to live as a private Catholic. He was hated by the emigre Catholic militants and strongly opposed the Jesuits. Memoranda of April 1582 and May 1583 reported him to be in the hands of the Inquisition, perhaps because of his political views, and he was also summoned to Rome in 1586 but refused to go -- though he was referred to in July 1587 as a possible cardinal. Dark references in his correspondence to matters of national security that could not be broached in open letters strongly suggest that he was supplying Walsingham with information on Catholic subversives on the continent -- 'I have a meaning (and very good means) to discredit some' ('CSP for.', 19.182) -- but the involvement in 1584 in the alleged treason of his recusant nephew Richard Shelley, on whose behalf he bravely petitioned the queen and Walsingham, must have put paid to any expectations that such services as he provided might be rewarded with a passport home. Sick and poor, heavily in debt, and begging for the payment of the arrears of his salary granted in happier days by Mary, Shelley gave final expression to the strength of conviction of his dual position -- 'a Catholic, yet in his heart... a most dutiful subject' (Stern, 76) -- by dying, probably of apoplexy, about 12 September 1587, following a heated dispute with Jesuits in Venice over their 'justifying of the English traitors executed in England' (Read, 3.282). The knights of St John quickly buried him, next day in Venice, and seized what property he had possessed. 


@@@@@


doc= 25314


Shelley, Samuel (1756-1808), artist, was born in Whitechapel, London, in August 1756. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 21 March 1774 (their records state that he was '17 last August') but he had first exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1773. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1774 to 1804, in that period missing only the 1775 exhibition. Through a judicious use of frames containing between five and ten miniature portraits Shelley exhibited well over 200 works. Initially he exhibited conventional miniature portraits but from 1780 he began exhibiting subject pictures. 
Shelley was self-taught as a miniaturist but was greatly influenced by the RA and its president, Sir Joshua Reynolds, who encouraged students towards history painting. Shelley aspired to be more than a painter of faces, hoping to demonstrate his invention and originality through painting subject pictures. He was probably equally encouraged by ventures such as the Shakspeare Gallery and Thomas Macklin's Poets' Gallery, which commissioned oil paintings based on subjects from Shakespeare and the great English poets. Reynolds contributed a painting, 'Macbeth and the Witches', which was the subject that Shelley chose for an exhibition piece at the RA in 1782 (V&A). 
Shelley collaborated successfully with engravers such as Bartolozzi. A major project was the 'Cabinet of Genius' (1787), a collection of poems by writers such as Gray, Pope, Thomson, and Goldsmith, each accompanied by an original design by Shelley. These were engraved by C. Taylor and W. Nutter in an oval format with a 'frame' in imitation of conventional oval portrait miniatures, and usually of a single figure, such as Sylvia from Pope's 'Summer'. The poems were published in batches of twelve but 'Gentlemen [could] bind any numbers together to make a volume, and in any order they please' ('Cabinet of Genius', 1, 1787, ii), and its success led to a second volume. This was a massive undertaking and the sixty-six designs by Shelley are of variable quality. 
Shelley worked prolifically on developing his ideas. The Royal Academy has the drawing 'A Vestal Virgin Attending a Sacred Flame', in pencil and watercolour. (Foskett refers to 'letters and drawings' held by the RA but only one drawing by Shelley and one brief letter from him, referring to and accompanying a drawing by another artist, are in the Royal Academy collection (Foskett, 1.504).) The Scottish National Gallery has sketches of symbolical figures in oil on paper and the Victoria and Albert Museum has sketchbooks in which Shelley worked out his compositional ideas. Shelley also belonged to an informal sketching society referred to by Farington in 1804: 'for four years past [they have] been accustomed to meet once a week during the winter season at each others houses... to sketch and converse upon Art' (Farington, 'Diary', 6.2271). 
But while Shelley's studio contained evidence of serious study -- in the form of Livy, Ripa, and others -- Shelley's designs, especially those for the 'Cabinet of Genius', would rank more as pretty, 'fancy' pictures than as rigorous 'histories'. While his prints were successful his subject miniatures failed to find a market. The public was interested only in miniatures of loved ones and the famous. When Shelley died his studio contained many unsold subject miniatures. 
Shelley was however a highly successful portraitist. He was employed at the court of George III and Queen Charlotte, although he was not accorded an official position there. He was ranked among the most well known and fashionable miniaturists of his time. The young miniaturist Andrew Robertson reported in a letter to his brother in 1802 that Shee had stated that if he pursued his ambition he would exceed Cosway and Shelley, the standard to be beaten. A number of Shelley's most beautiful and compositionally complex portraits are notable for their rich, heavily gummed colour in imitation of oil, such as 'The Misses Annabella and Mary Crawford' (1782; V&A). But most of his miniatures found in public collections and in salerooms are conventional in size, composition, and colouring. 
Farington reports that Shelley was very exercised about being chosen by the Royal Academicians as an associate (Farington, 'Diary', 3.1042). He was passed over on two occasions, which probably exacerbated his frustration with the lack of public interest in his 'histories' and his suspicion that his work was at a disadvantage next to the oil paintings which dominated the RA exhibitions. In 1804 Shelley and W. F. Wells encouraged seven other watercolour artists to found the Society of Painters in Water Colours (subsequently known as the Old Watercolour Society) and at a meeting on 30 November 1804 he was made treasurer. The first exhibition opened on 22 April 1805, and in the period up to 1808 Shelley submitted sixty-three paintings. A large watercolour on paper, 'Memory Gathering the Flowers Mowed Down by Time' (V&A), appeared at the first exhibition. Shelley was the only miniaturist to join the society and his fellow members were mostly landscape artists. Miniature painting had always had a place in the main exhibition room at the RA but landscape watercolours were relegated to small anterooms. Shelley's fellow watercolourists believed that in exhibiting portraits at the new society Shelley was not promoting the objectives of the society and so voted to exclude him from a share of the profits. Shelley resigned as treasurer in December 1806. 
Shelley lived in London all his working life, at 7 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, from 1784 to 1794 and at 6 George Street, Hanover Square, from 1794 until his death there on 22 December 1808. (Coincidentally the dowager Lady Shelley died on the same day, leading some writers to suggest that there is confusion over the date of Shelley's death.) Edward Nash and Alexander Robertson were his pupils. The sale catalogue of his collection of books, prints, drawings, and miniatures, organized by his friend the auctioneer Peter Coxe on 22 March 1809, pays tribute to him as 'Nobleman, Gentleman, Collector, Connoisseur and Artist', and states that he 'Leaves his best Image in his Works enshrined'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25315


Shelley, Sir William (1478/9-1549), lawyer, was the son of John Shelley (1456-1527), a member of a family of London mercers and aldermen, and his wife, Elizabeth (1460-1513), the posthumous daughter of John Faulconer, otherwise Michelgrove, of Clapham in Sussex. His younger sister, Elizabeth Shelley, was abbess of St Mary's, Winchester, between 1527 and 1539. The Shelleys were rumoured to be the abbot of Waltham's bondmen of a manor near Ware, Hertfordshire, and in 1467 Sir William's grandfather John Shelley, soon to be sheriff of London, broke the head of a fellow mercer who had called him a churl. Although later generations would claim a more elevated pedigree, the origins of the Shelleys should be sought among the Hertfordshire peasantry. In 1474 John Shelley joined the Sussex gentry by marriage to Elizabeth Michelgrove, a close relative of John Ernley, the future attorney-general. Probably a member of the Inner Temple, Shelley sat as MP for Horsham in 1491-2. William Shelley was admitted to the same inn at some point between 1500 and July 1502. 
Probably about 1498 William Shelley married Alice ('b'. 'c'.1481, died in or before 1537), the daughter of Harry Belknap (died 1488) of Knelle in Beckley near Rye in Sussex. He acquired as brothers-in-law the courtier and soldier Sir Edward Belknap (1470-1521) and John Caryll (died 1523) of the Inner Temple, with whom he or his father shared chambers. In 1512 Shelley took his father's place on the Sussex bench. He failed to become solicitor to the Merchant Adventurers but was appointed recorder of Coventry, where Belknap had influence; his predecessor Anthony Fitzherbert described him as 'a gentleman of good conscience and well learned in the law' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 3.310). He joined Thomas More as an under-sheriff of London in June 1514 and resigned his office at Coventry the following year having found, like Fitzherbert before him, the residence requirement too onerous. As under-sheriff Shelley was a permanent legal official, advising the sheriffs and sitting as a judge in the weekly sheriffs' court. In 1520 Shelley succeeded Richard Broke as recorder, and represented the city in the parliament of 1523. He conducted delicate negotiations with the crown concerning city offices, loans, and the disarming of the Londoners following the execution in 1521 of the duke of Buckingham, who had been indicted before him at the Guildhall. 
Plague forced the postponement of Shelley's reading in the autumn of 1517 until the following Lent. He was not included in the serjeants' call of December 1520, but in April received the king's letter to replace Baldwin Malet, who had used his influence to obtain a discharge. Shelley, too late to prepare his serjeant's reading, took the degree at Ely House on 29 or 30 June 1521. When in London, of which he remained recorder, Shelley lived in St Sepulchre, Holborn, where in 1523 he was assessed for $133 in goods; his lands, worth $140 a year, consisted largely of the fourth share of the Belknap estate which he had inherited in 1521. In January 1526 he was passed over as chief baron of the exchequer, an office for which the recordership was often a prelude, but by 17 November had been appointed to Fitzherbert's place as fourth justice of the court of common pleas; for the next seven years he rode the western assize circuit as junior justice to Sir John Fitzjames. Shelley succeeded to his father's estates in January 1527, at the age of forty-eight, and by 1534 had rebuilt Michelgrove as one of the finest houses in Sussex. He entertained the king, who subsequently told Shelley's son of the 'great cheer' he had had there. From 1529 until his death he was personally summoned to parliament by writ of assistance; he remained an active member of the Sussex bench, which he chaired as 'custos rotulorum' from before 1532. 
Shelley's office of recorder of London involved frequent attendance on Thomas Wolsey, and it is clear that a friendship developed between the two men. Shelley advised Wolsey on the foundation of Cardinal College, and took the surrenders of several of the smaller houses dissolved for its creation in 1526. On Wolsey's fall, and perhaps as a test of his loyalty, Shelley was sent to Esher to receive possession of York Place, the archbishop's Westminster palace, for the king. According to George Cavendish, after an ironic interrogation of the judge on the conflict of law and conscience, the cardinal closed their interview by charging Shelley with the unenviable task of reminding Henry 'that there is both heaven and hell' (Cavendish, 119). York Place was to become Whitehall Palace, and Shelley was to be knighted there between 20 June and 24 November 1530. He seems to have respected Wolsey's subsequent entreaty 'for the old amity and love that hath been betwixt us and for that I have used your counsel therein to be good master' to his college ('LP Henry VIII', 4, 6577), and the marriage of his heir, John Shelley, to the daughter of Wolsey's loyal treasurer William Fitzwilliam of Milton endorses the probability of his close involvement with the cardinal's circle. 
While his wealth and landed estate grew, Shelley found himself increasingly out of sympathy with the political and religious changes of the 1530s. In December 1534 his remarks to Fitzherbert about heretical books, and condemnation of the 'Supplication' of Dr Robert Barnes as 'a most detestable book of heresy' (Elton, 32-3) were reported to the king's council, and for the Lent assize of 1535 he was transferred to the home circuit under the watchful eye of his junior, the attorney-general Christopher Hales. Shelley was one of the quorum in the commissions of 23 April and 1 June for the trials of the Carthusians and of John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, but was omitted from that of 26 June for the trial of Sir Thomas More. He had been among the judges who upheld the will of Baron Dacre of the South early in the month but was absent, pleading sickness, at the crucial second meeting when the majority gave way to Thomas Cromwell and reversed their opinion in favour of the king's fiscal strategy. Shelley was dropped from the summer assize of 1535, when the judges were given specific instructions to publicize the supreme headship and the exemplary executions of Fisher and More; he was not commissioned again for almost a decade. 
Richard Shelley remembered that in Cromwell's time his father had 'passed storms, and with great loss' (BL, Lansdowne MS 35, fol. 143), and there is evidence of the antagonism of the king's minister, although they had been on good terms before Wolsey's fall. Early in 1537 Cromwell proposed that the crown should purchase the timber on the manor of Knelle in Sussex, valued by Shelley at $2000, but began to treat the transaction as a sale of the lordship itself. 'Surely sir', wrote Sir William Shelley 'there was never motion made to me of any sale of the manor but only of the woods and that was by your good lordship' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/117, fol. 141). The sale of timber went ahead, and four years later Shelley's woods were still being felled for the king's works at Calais and Camber. Although Cromwell's servants felt able to help themselves to hawks bred by Shelley at Michelgrove, Sir William was sufficiently confident in his own position to ask for several local manors in exchange for Knelle. No attempt was made to remove Shelley from the bench, either at Westminster or in Sussex, where he remained active as an instrument of government policy, investigating a riot by Sir Geoffrey Pole in 1536 and seeking the origin of rumours of the king's death in 1537, when Cromwell sent him to take the surrender of Titchfield Abbey in Hampshire. 
According to Richard Shelley, the king finally made much of Sir William Shelley and in 1541, after Cromwell's fall, he was granted two of his manors in Essex; but he was to wait over three years for another assize commission, as the senior judge on the midland circuit. He acted as a receiver of petitions in the Lords in parliaments between 1539 and 1547 and, through the marriages of his son Thomas and daughter Elizabeth to members of the Copley family, seems to have shared effective control over the seat at Gatton in Surrey, of which the Copleys were the only electors. His servant Thomas Bishop of Henfield (who was to marry Edward Belknap's illegitimate daughter) represented the borough in 1542, his nephew Edward Bellingham in 1545, and his son Richard Shelley (c.1513-1587) in 1547. 
In 1544 Sir William Shelley may have accompanied the king to the siege of Boulogne, where his son Edward Shelley, a master of the household and gentleman of the privy chamber, was lieutenant of the horsemen. Edward was killed leading a cavalry charge at Pinkie in 1547. Sir William Shelley died, probably at Michelgrove, on 4 January 1549, and was buried at Clapham parish church in Sussex; a monument over his grave, depicting him in judicial robes with his wife, seven sons, and seven daughters, was still unfinished eighteen months later. His will, providing for the saying of 100 masses, is further evidence of his religious conservatism, which his descendants would maintain for many generations. 
Shelley's judicial experience spanned thirty-three years, and he sat at Westminster for over twenty. But although he enjoyed a longevity that was denied to many of his fellows and remained a loyal servant of the crown, Shelley's less than wholehearted participation in the religious and political changes of the 1530s, his readiness to resist the king in 'Lord Dacre's case' in 1535, and his continued maintenance of the old religion ensured that the highest prizes eluded him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25316


Shelton, John (d. 1845), army officer, was commissioned ensign in the 9th foot on 21 November 1805, became lieutenant on 26 August 1807, and captain on 17 June 1813. He served with the 9th in Portugal in 1808, being present at Rolica, Vimeiro, and Corunna; in the Walcheren expedition of 1809; and again in the Peninsula in 1812-13. He was at the siege and capture of Badajoz, at Salamanca, Burgos, Vitoria, and San Sebastian, where he lost his right arm. In 1814 he served in Canada. In 1817 he exchanged into the 44th foot (later 1st battalion, Essex regiment), which went to India in 1822, and was employed in Arakan during the First Anglo-Burmese War. He became regimental major on 6 February 1825, and lieutenant-colonel on 16 September 1827. For the next thirteen years he commanded the 44th in India, respected but not liked by the officers and men, for he was a harsh and imperious martinet, 'not a pleasant man on parade'. 
At the end of 1840 Shelton was put in charge of a brigade, the 44th and two Indian regiments, to replace part of the force in Afghanistan. Colin Mackenzie, who accompanied the brigade, wrote that 'Shelton's gross want of arrangement and the unnecessary hardship he has exposed the men to... have caused much discontent' (Macrory, 137). He reached Jalalabad with his brigade in January 1841, made a punitive expedition into the Nazian valley in February, had to return through the Khyber to the Indus in May to open the road for Shah Shuja's family, and arrived at Kabul on 9 June. There, with the rank of brigadier-general, he was second in command to the ineffectual Elphinstone. Brave in battle but apparently stupid, Shelton was morose, cantankerous, churlish, bad-tempered, friendless, hated by officers and men, and openly contemptuous of Elphinstone, who disliked and distrusted him, and they failed to co-operate. Elphinstone wrote of Shelton, 'his manner was most contumacious... he... invariably found fault with all that was done' (Macrory, 169). George Lawrence considered him 'a great croaker and anxious to return to India' (Macrory, 157). However, as Sir John Fortescue wrote, 'it can never be known how far incessant physical pain, due to the rough surgery of those days, may have embittered his character' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 163). 
Shelton was camped at Siah Sang, 2 miles east of the city, when the Afghan outbreak began, on 2 November 1841, with the murder of Sir Alexander Burnes. He was ordered to occupy the Bala Hissar (the Kabul citadel) with part of his brigade, to reinforce the shah's troops; but when he had been there a week he was summoned to the cantonments to assist Elphinstone and infuse some vigour into the defence. By then (9 November) the commissariat fort with vital supplies had been lost. The cantonments were commanded by the adjacent hills; their boundary was of no defensive strength, and nearly 2 miles long. There was only one British regiment, the 44th, and this, like others, was discouraged. Elphinstone, infirm and unstable, asked the advice of everyone, but would delegate authority to no one. Sir William Macnaghten, the envoy, energetic and self-confident, had much to say on military measures, and Shelton was ordered to carry out operations of which he disapproved. His own unyielding temper was ill suited to such a position. In this crisis he failed to provide decisive and effective leadership. At councils of war he ostentatiously slept or feigned sleep, and criticized Macnaghten in his absence. When Colin Mackenzie protested Shelton replied, 'Damn it, Mackenzie, I 'will' sneer at him! I 'like' to sneer at him!' (Macrory, 171). 
On 10 November Shelton led an attack on the Rikabashee Fort, which was within 400 yards of the north-east angle of the cantonments. He had twice to rally his men before the fort was taken, and the 44th had nearly 100 men killed or wounded. He bungled his sortie to the Beymaroo hills (23 November), using unsuitable square formation and unnecessarily exposing his force to enemy fire and the resultant casualties; his force was routed and the survivors further discouraged. For 'this most disgraceful day' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 224) Shelton blamed the Sepoys, but contemporaries blamed Shelton. 
Shelton favoured withdrawal from Kabul, but it was not until 11 December, when reportedly only one day's provisions remained, that Macnaghten met the Afghan chiefs in conference. He was treacherously shot by Akbar Khan on 23 December, and on 6 January 1842 the retreat from Kabul began. 
During the retreat Shelton fought bravely with the rearguard. At Jagdalak on 11 January he was ordered to accompany Elphinstone to a meeting with Akbar Khan, and to remain with the latter as a hostage. He thus escaped the final massacre. He was well treated, quarrelled with his fellow captives, and was rescued with them by Sir Richmond Shakespeare and his cavalry on 17 September, after Sir George Pollock had reoccupied Kabul. 
Elphinstone, whom Shelton blamed, had died and Shelton, the senior surviving officer, on 20 January 1843 was court-martialled at Ludhiana on four charges: ordering preparations to be made for retreat without authority; using disrespectful language to the general within hearing of the troops; entering into clandestine correspondence with Akbar Khan to obtain forage for his own horses while the envoy's negotiations were going on; suffering himself to be taken prisoner at Jagdalak by want of due precaution. He was acquitted on all charges except the third, and the court held that that had been duly censured at the time. They praised his 'personal gallantry of the highest kind, and... noble devotion as a soldier' (Macrory, 269). 
Shelton returned to England and resumed command of the 44th, which had been practically raised afresh at its Colchester depot. He had become colonel in the army on 23 November 1841, and had had the local rank of major-general in India. On 10 May 1845, when the 44th was at Richmond barracks, Dublin, his horse bolted and threw him in the barrack square, inflicting such injuries on him that he died after three days' agony. Reportedly when the regiment heard of his death they turned out on the parade ground and gave three cheers. His remains were interred 'with unusual military pomp' ('GM', 197) at St Peter's Church, Dublin. He left considerable property which passed to his nephew, Lieutenant William Shelton, 9th foot. He received no medals or decorations for his many campaigns, except Shah Shuja's discredited order of the Durrani empire. Sir John Fortescue later wrote of him: 'the brightest figure in the retreat from Kabul... to so gallant a spirit surely much may be forgiven' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 245). Maybe, but there was much to forgive. 


@@@@@


doc= 25317


Shelton, Sir Richard (1578-1647), lawyer and politician, was born in Birmingham on 21 January 1578, the elder of two sons of John Shelton (died 1601), a mercer there, and Barbara, the daughter and heir of Francis Stanley of West Bromwich. Shelton appears to have studied at Cambridge during the early or mid-1590s -- he would also serve there as university counsel in 1625-31. He was at Clement's Inn and then proceeded to the Inner Temple in 1597, being called to the bar on 8 July 1606. During the late 1610s or early 1620s he joined the retinue of George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, and possibly because of this he gained a series of prestigious offices at the Temple, being called to the bench on 26 January 1623, serving as Lenten reader in 1625, and finally being appointed treasurer on 3 November 1628, an office he would hold until November 1634. In October 1625 the duke obtained for him the office of solicitor-general. It was customary for solicitors-general who had not been knighted to have that honour bestowed with their office, and he was knighted on 31 October 1625 by Charles I, at Hampton Court. 
During the parliaments of 1626 and 1628-9 Shelton served in the Commons as a member from Bridgnorth, Shropshire (he was also elected, but did not sit, for Guildford in 1626). His performance in parliament was undistinguished, especially given that the solicitor-general was expected to be a major spokesman for the court. Although he served as chair of the committee of the whole on supply in 1628-9, was appointed to a number of committees, and carried out various directives of the house, these assignments may have reflected more a sense of his status than of his ability. He was only moderately active in debate and does not appear to have had much influence. In March 1628 his intrusion into a debate on the ramifications of the five knights' case seriously compromised court strategy, while prompting a response from John Selden which included sarcasm at Shelton's 'ingenuity' in searching out precedents for the case. 
As solicitor-general Shelton was appointed to a commission to compound with recusants in November 1625 and in December 1633 to the reinforced high commission, which exercised ecclesiastical jurisdiction in England and Wales. During a Commons debate in February 1629 he defended the appointment of Richard Mountague, object of attack in the Commons, as bishop of Chichester. Neither his support for Mountague nor his presence on the commissions reveals his religious stance, since he was simply following crown initiatives. After the assassination of Buckingham in August 1628 Shelton does not appear to have had a major patron. When Sir Robert Heath was appointed chief justice of the common pleas in October 1631 it was not Shelton, but William Noy, who succeeded him as attorney-general, although the succession of the solicitor-general to the post would have followed the usual pattern. It is not known whether Shelton pushed his case for promotion; if he did, his failure may have been because he lacked a strong patron or ally at court. 
In October 1634 Shelton was pressured into surrendering his patent as solicitor-general. Since he was not accused of misbehaviour, he could not simply be dismissed. Instead, he was able to negotiate a settlement that left him king's counsellor-at-large, with his former status and profits, and it appears that he could have opted for appointments as king's serjeant or puisne justice. In referring to his removal from office Edward Hyde, later earl of Clarendon, described him as 'an old, illiterate, useless person' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.110), but however fair this characterization may be it is unlikely that Shelton was forced out for sheer incompetence. Rather it appears that William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury, was cementing his power at court and wanted law officers in place who were loyal to him, as was Sir Edward Littleton, Shelton's successor. 
Shelton does not seem to have been significantly involved with government business after he gave up his place as solicitor-general, although in March 1639 he joined other Inner Temple benchers in making a contribution to support the king's expedition against the Scots. By that time he was semi-retired, living on his manor at West Bromwich (a property that he had inherited from a cousin, William Stanley, in 1626) with his wife, Lettice (died 1642), the daughter of Sir Robert Fisher of Packington. He contributed $150 to the Staffordshire parliamentarian county committee in 1644. He died in 1647 and was buried in West Bromwich on 7 December. The Sheltons left no children. West Bromwich passed to a nephew, John, who had also benefited from the family tie when in April 1629 he gained special admission to the Inner Temple at Shelton's behest. 


@@@@@


doc= 25318


Shelton, Thomas (fl. 1598-1629), translator, was probably the third of seven sons of Henry Shelton (died 'c'.1605), a Dublin merchant imprisoned in 1596 for refusing to take the oath of supremacy when he was elected sheriff, and his wife, Margaret, the sister of Peter Nangle, guardian of the Franciscan convent at Armagh, and thorn in the side of the authorities. Thomas may be the 'Thomas Shelton, Dublinensis' in the 1597 student list of the Irish college at Salamanca (Knowles, 174). 
In late 1598 Thomas's elder brother, John, was involved in an abortive plot to seize Dublin Castle for Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, who had mounted a serious rebellion. John was hanged, and Thomas was sought as an accomplice (Knowles, 164). On 31 March 1600 a spy reported that he was at Tyrone's headquarters with Richard Nugent, a prominent Irish nobleman. A year later he offered his services to Florence MacCarthy, an equally obdurate rebel, in a letter which was intercepted and was added to a growing intelligence file. Nugent and Shelton arrived in Spain in June 1601 and Shelton went on to Flanders. He next turns up (as Thomas Skelton) in February 1604 at a capitular assembly at Douai presided over by Father Christopher Cusack, which suggests he was teaching at one of the English colleges. 
Shelton was the first person to translate 'Don Quixote' into English, but his literary career began with an unremarkable piece in 'Cynthia' (1604), a book of lyric verse published in London by Nugent, and an equally conventional verse, 'To his Deare Friend, M. Richard Verstegan', in Verstegan's 'Restitution of Decayed Intelligence in Antiquities' (1605). Shelton's version of the first part of 'Don Quixote' was published in London by Edward Blount in 1612. His original was the Velpius edition published in Brussels in 1607 (Knowles, 162). The signs of haste in the translation, which took Shelton only forty days, do not hide his verve, command of Spanish, and knowledge of Spain. Shelton published the second part of 'Don Quixote' anonymously with Blount in 1620. James Fitzmaurice-Kelly's introduction to Shelton's translation claims that John Fletcher's 'Knight of the Burning Pestle' was derived from Shelton, as was 'Cardenio' (1613), a lost play by Shakespeare and Fletcher. But the book sold slowly, not being reprinted until 1652. It is dedicated to Theophilus Howard, Baron de Walden. Alexander Wright argues that Shelton and Howard were distantly related, which is not impossible despite the lack of evidence. But it is more likely that Howard, who had previously shown interest in contacting English exiles, met Shelton on a visit to the Low Countries in 1610. Shelton's past history would suggest that the 'deare friend' of the dedication was Verstegan, given that Verstegan was a Catholic refugee active in religious controversy. 
In February 1612 Shelton, together with a Captain Rathfert, contacted William Trumbull, the English agent in Brussels, with authorization to negotiate the reconciliation of Tyrone with the crown. This seems to have prompted accusations that Shelton, Cusack, and John Roche, chaplain to Archbishop Bentivoglio, the nuncio to Brussels, were informers working for the English authorities. After questioning the accused, Bentivoglio wrote to the papal secretary, affirming that Shelton had lived in Flanders for several years and was of honourable reputation. He adds that Shelton's father had died after eight years in prison for his faith, and that his brother had been executed for the attempt on Dublin Castle. 
By the summer of 1613 Shelton was short of money and ill. When he had recovered, he left for Paris with a letter of introduction from Trumbull to Sir Thomas Edmundes, the English ambassador. Trumbull disapproves of his religion, but attests to Shelton's knowledge of Irish affairs, to his skill in Spanish and French, and to his loyalty to his majesty, for which 'he is persecuted by the barbarous Irishe, as a malefactor. He is borne of honest and worthy parents, and allyed to sundry of the best familyes in the English Pale' (Knowles, 171). Once in Paris Shelton made contact with his cousin, Henry Stanihurst, and M. de Beaulieu, a friend of Trumbull's, and set about looking for work, but without success. His letter of 6 March 1614 to Trumbull, which is extremely abusive about the French, their promises, and their attitude to foreigners, raises the issue of a pardon and return to England: 'for I have great hope by my ld. of Walden's means, to get some advancement if I were there' (George, 157). This must be the dedicatee of 'Don Quixote'. Shelton may have given his reasons for seeking a pardon in one of the letters he asked Trumbull to destroy. 
Relations with Trumbull now began to cool. In his last letter to Trumbull (28 March 1614) Shelton says he was a messenger for somebody, had been asked to do something underhand, and had refused. Beaulieu reported to Trumbull that Shelton was desperately poor, but that he had acquired either a wife or a mistress. However, a letter written in Spanish (20 November 1629) by Father Thomas Strange, guardian of the Franciscans in Dublin, informs Father Luke Wadding that Strange had received Thomas Shelton of Dublin into the order and asks him to take Shelton into the Franciscan community in Rome (B. Jennings, 'Wadding Papers', 1953, 320). It is not known what happened to the wife or when Shelton died. 


@@@@@


doc= 25319


Shelton, Thomas (1600/01-1650?), stenographer, is believed to have been descended from the prominent Norfolk landowning Shelton family, although there is no firm evidence for his parentage or early life. Probably the most famous shorthand inventor of his day, he was teaching in London from the early 1620s until his death, probably in London some time early in 1650. In 1630 he was living in Cheapside, but by 1642 had moved to Old Fish Street and by 1645 to The Poultry. His wife may have been the Ann Shelton who was buried on 6 October 1650 at St Giles Cripplegate. 
Shelton's earliest and most successful shorthand system, 'Short-Writing', was registered with the Stationers' Company on 17 April 1626; no copy of this edition appears to have survived. 'Short-Writing' was reissued in 1630 and 1633. In 1635 an updated version, renamed 'Tachygraphy', was published in Cambridge, the first of several such editions to be produced by the university press there. 'Tachygraphy' was first printed in London in 1639, with at least twenty-two further editions up to 1710, several of them pirated. Both 'Short-Writing' and 'Tachygraphy' incorporate many of the features of Edmond Willis's scheme of 1618 ('An Abreviation of Writing by Character'), as well as some elements of John Willis's earlier system (published anonymously as 'The Art of Stenographie', 1602). One of the most popular systems of its time, Shelton's tachygraphy was in use until at least the late eighteenth century, when it was employed by Thomas Jefferson. Among others known to have favoured his system are John Rushworth, Samuel Pepys, and the English civil war army secretary, Sir William Clarke. 
In 1642 Shelton issued a companion volume, 'A Tutor to Tachygraphy', with two further editions in 1642. Both the 'Tutor' and the 1647 edition of 'Tachygraphy' were reprinted by the Augustan Reprint Society of Los Angeles in 1970. A Latin translation of 'Tachygraphy', 'Tachy-Graphia', appeared in 1660 and again in 1671. 'Tachygraphy' was also translated into both French (Paris, 1681) and German (Leipzig, 1743). A new version of 'Tachygraphy' by an anonymous author, combining it with some of the features of Jeremiah Rich's system, was produced in 1684 as 'The Art of Short Writing According to Tachygraphy', with, apparently, a further edition in 1705, of which no copy is known to have survived. 
Late in 1649, just before he died, and perhaps because of the appearance of several illicit editions of 'Tachygraphy', Shelton completed a wholly new shorthand system entitled 'Zeiglographia' (1650). Never as popular as the tachygraphy for which he is chiefly remembered, this was the first shorthand system ever to be advertised, both separately (BL, Harley MS 5921, fol. 29'r') and in the newsbook 'Mercurius Politicus' (no. 18, 3-10 October 1650, and subsequent issues). 
Shelton's 'Whole Book of Psalms in Meeter', containing the metrical psalms of Sternhold and Hopkins, written in his system of tachygraphy and engraved by Thomas Cross, appeared posthumously, probably 'c'.1660. Shelton was renowned for taking down in shorthand the sermons of leading puritan divines, and his record of twenty-three 'exercises before sermons', delivered by the radical Independent minister Walter Cradock, 'Divine Drops Distilled', was printed in 1650. 
Shelton's own religious sympathies emerge clearly in 'A Centurie of Similies' (1640), his only published work which was totally unconnected with shorthand. Vigorously puritanical in tone, it may account for Shelton's appearance, along with its printer Ralph Mabb, before the court of high commission in April-November 1640. Shelton also had connections with the radical MP Richard Knightley (died 1639), to whom he dedicated 'Short-Writing' and early issues of 'Tachygraphy'; his own support for the parliamentarian side during the English civil wars is clear from his dedication of 'Zeiglographia' (1650) to the newly established Commonwealth, to which he wished 'heavenly grace and earthly glory'. 
The earliest known portrait of Shelton prefaces the 1647 edition of 'Tachygraphy' (which gives his age as forty-six), with re-engraved versions appearing in 'Zeiglographia' (1650), 'The Whole Book of Psalmes' (1660?), and 'Tachy-Graphia' (1660). 


@@@@@


doc= 25320


Shelvocke, George (1675-1742), privateer and author, was born in Deptford and entered the navy in 1690. On 25 April 1704 he was commissioned lieutenant in the 'Scarborough'. He moved into the 'Association', then the 'Britannia', and soon afterwards was paid off. He found employment again only at the reduced rank of purser, in which he served aboard the 'Monck' until 1713, when he was paid off once more before enduring five years of severe poverty. He applied for help to Edward Hughes, who had been purser in the 'Scarborough' and was then partner in a plan to finance a privateering expedition to the South seas. Shelvocke was promised command of the larger of the two vessels, the 'Success'. Letters of marque and reprisal were issued by the high court of Admiralty on 1 January 1719, authorizing Hughes and his associates 'to set upon by force of Arms, and to subdue and take the Men of War, Ships, and other Vessels whatsoever, as also the Goods, Monies and Merchandizes, belonging to the King of Spain, his vassals and Subjects' (TNA: PRO, HCA 26/29: 5). The 'Scheme of the Voyage' presented by the owners to the commanders was rather more specific, and instructed them to raid the town of Paita on the Peruvian coast, and to capture the treasure-ship plying between Lima and Panama. John Clipperton, who had sailed as chief mate with William Dampier in the 'St George' (1703-4), was named commander of the 'Success', and Shelvocke was given the smaller ship, the 'Speedwell', a demotion resulting from excesses he committed with ship's stores while recruiting crew at Ostend. The expedition got under way on 13 February 1719. Very soon Shelvocke lost touch with Clipperton, and proceeded on his own into the Pacific Ocean where he raided Paita and headed for Juan Fernandez, the last point of rendezvous with Clipperton. There, on 25 May 1720, the 'Speedwell' was wrecked in circumstances that left Shelvocke's management and motives open to doubt. For five months he and his crew were marooned on 'the Land of Robinson Crusoes' (Burney, 4.465), oddly perched between fact and fiction. Experiences of life on a deserted island was then a subject of public interest. Alexander Selkirk had become famous for the four years he spent in solitude on the island after he was left there by John Stradling of the 'Cinque Ports', Dampier's consort, in 1705. And in the same year Shelvocke set out for the South seas, Daniel Defoe published 'The Life and Strange Surprizing Adventures of Robinson Crusoe', loosely based on Selkirk's experiences. Indeed Shelvocke had been heard to say, 'It was not difficult living at Fernandes, if a man should accidentally be thrown there, since Mr Selkirk had continu'd upon it four years by himself' (Betagh, 172). 
Shelvocke and his men built a 20 ton boat out of the wreck of the 'Speedwell', called her the 'Recovery', and put to sea in October. They transferred into their first prize, renamed the 'Happy Return', and resumed the cruise, several times encountering Clipperton in the 'Success'. But when Clipperton discovered that the ship's articles in Shelvocke's vessel had been changed after the events on Juan Fernandez to resemble the 'Jamaica discipline' of the buccaneers, he refused to accompany it, and the owner's agent, James Hendry, and Thomas Dodd, lieutenant of marines, went aboard the 'Success'. After transferring into a bigger prize, the 300 ton 'Sacra Familia', Shelvocke captured the 'Concepcion de Recova', heavily laden with sweetmeats and (according to an eyewitness) a large amount of silver which Shelvocke neglected to report. Suffering severely from thirst and scurvy, he and the survivors (a third of the original complement) made their way to Canton, where he sold his prize and took passage for England in the East Indiaman 'Cadogan'; he arrived at Dover on 1 August 1722, and little more is heard of him after that. 
In 1724 Shelvocke presented a journal of his 'Voyage to the South Sea to cruise on the Spaniards' to the lords of the Admiralty. In the expanded published version, 'A Voyage Round the World by Way of the Great South Sea' (1726), he presciently discusses the economic possibilities of guano and whaling, as well as mentioning traces of gold on the coast of California. His narrative is best remembered for the solitary albatross shot by Simon Hatley as the 'Speedwell' entered the Southern Ocean, an episode absent from the manuscript version but told in the book with such laconic emphasis that it found a passage to Wordsworth's heart, and thence to Coleridge's 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner' (1798). In 1726 Shelvocke wrote a memorial to the lords of the Admiralty, responding to a revival of interest in the scheme of establishing a British base off the coast of South America. He suggests Chiloe as 'the most weatherly & commodious place in every respect to curb the power of the Spaniards in South America' (BL, Add. MS 19034, fol. 84'v'). 
It is clear from his journal and the 'Voyage' that Shelvocke had enemies. He speaks scornfully of John Clipperton, whom he accuses of thwarting the expedition and of cheating the owners, and several times he recalls darkly how Clipperton stole Dampier's privateering commission fifteen years before, causing him to be imprisoned at Batavia on a charge of piracy, as if to draw a parallel between his case and Dampier's -- 'for I well remember'd how Dampier had been serv'd in these seas' (Shelvocke, 218). William Betagh, Edward Brooke, Samuel Randall, and Simon Hatley are accused of insubordination and mutiny, and Thomas Dodd and James Hendry are represented as periodically insane. The only one to respond publicly to these charges was William Betagh, who was captured by the Spanish before the 'Speedwell' was lost. His testimony against Shelvocke is therefore largely hearsay, based on George Taylor's and Thomas Dodd's journals (no longer extant) for eyewitness reports of events which took place after his disappearance. In his 'Voyage Round the World' (1728) Betagh tells a story of a captain of Machiavellian cunning, led on by revenge, greed, and love of power to construct a chain of seeming accidents designed to impugn the characters of his colleagues, to thin his crew, to force a change in the ship's articles, to defraud the owners of the bulk of the profit of the cruise, and to leave him -- the perpetrator -- looking like a helpless victim of misfortune and ill will. Specifically Betagh alleges that Shelvocke had no intention of accompanying Clipperton, and while still in the Atlantic took advantage of his independence by committing an act of piracy against a Portuguese ship. He goes on to say that covertly Shelvocke fomented two mutinies against his own command, first at St Catherine's in Brazil and then at Juan Fernandez, and that the latter plan included the deliberate wrecking of the 'Speedwell', an act performed on a serene day after various important items (including Shelvocke's commission and the ship's forge) had been sent ashore. Although Betagh suggests that this was done to exclude the owners from any interest in prizes taken in a new bottom, it seems more likely that Shelvocke aimed at two things -- a revision of articles that would suit him while compromising the crew, and a situation sufficiently critical to cause some of them to remain on the island (eleven stayed behind), so increasing his dividend in another way. Betagh also accuses Shelvocke of drinking Jacobite toasts, and of celebrating the Pretender's birthday on Juan Fernandez with white cockades and volleys of musketry. 
Although twentieth-century studies of the voyage have relied to a large extent on Betagh for important details, particularly concerning the legal aftermath, the lack of official corroboration has left him vulnerable. W. G. Perrin and Philip Edwards believe that his account of the St Catherine's mutiny is basically correct, yet Perrin inclines to the view that the bulk of his testimony is 'a rather incoherent jumble of accusations' (Perrin, 19). In the most authoritative recent discussion of these charges and counter-charges, Glyndwr Williams joins with O. H. K. Spate in believing it 'unprofitable to decide which was the more atrocious traducer' (Williams, 197; Spate, 383). 'Chancery records', however, have turned up an application for a writ of 'ne exeat regnum' which supports to some degree Betagh's account of the voyage and of the legal entanglements following it. Betagh claims that Edward Hughes, disbelieving what Shelvocke told him when he finally got to London, had him placed first in the Wood Street compter and then in the king's bench while seeking a writ. Although no proof remains of Shelvocke's incarceration, the grant of the writ exists (TNA: PRO, C 33/339, pt 1, 7). In it Edward Hughes, John Gumley, Beake Winder, and Henry Neale (listed as owners in the letters of marque) are joined by five others (Alexander Strahan, Hinnfred Sharpe, Andrew Drummond, Richard Chichley, and George Middleton) to cite George Shelvocke, Blowfield Coldsea (master), Matthew Stewart (who organized the mutiny at St Catherine's), John Rainor (lieutenant of marines), George Shelvocke junior, and five more of the crew for breaking the articles of the cruise. The entry states: 'Shelvocke soon after setting sail with the ship Speedwell in Company with the Success being separated by a storm from her wilfully neglected joining with the said Ship Success again but proceeded... to voyage by himself & not only plundered... a vessel in Amity wt his Ma[jes]tie but also took severall Spanish Ships of considerable value & shared & divided up the prizes amongst himself & his Ships Company as by Affidt thereto annext.' The affidavits were supplied by William Betagh and Thomas Dodd, but the owners themselves affirmed that Shelvocke and his fellow defendants gave them no adequate account of prizes taken between July and August 1721 (including the 'Concepcion de Recova'), and the court found the evidence convincing enough to proceed. There seems little reason to doubt the estimate, based on Betagh's transcription of Stewart's account book, that Shelvocke emerged from the voyage with a sum adjacent to $7000, some of which he used to bribe himself out of trouble. For Betagh continues the story from the granting of writ: 'Shelvocke getting bail to the action at common law, contrived so with the marshal of the king's bench prison, that he escaped on a Sunday, and prevented the said writ in chancery being served upon him; and has ever since absconded. Mean time the bill in chancery was carry'd on, to which Shelvocke refusing to put in answer, a writ of rebellion was issued out: but a brother in law of Shelvocke apply'd to two of the owners, being complainants in the bill, and so prevailed with them, that they pretended they were about a composition with the defendant: so that a sudden stop was made to the prosecution. (Betagh, 230)' It is fair to add that it was not uncommon for privateering cruises to end in mutual recrimination and litigation. Depositions were taken accusing Dampier and Rogers of having secreted plunder; and there were bitter disputes between the crews of George Anson's squadron about the distribution of prize money. Perhaps the best state of the case against Shelvocke is given by John Harris (ed. John Campbell), upon whom John Callender and James Burney rely for their judgement of the voyage. Campbell believes that three aspects of Betagh's story deserve attention: Clipperton's refusal to cruise with him once he suspected him of piracy; the regular losses of ship's crew by capture, misadventure, and marooning; and the lading of the 'Concepcion de Recova'. Although he does not spell it out, Harris finds 'a very extraordinary piece of secret history' linking the revision of the ship's articles (in which the Juan Fernandez episode seems to have been crucial) to the wastage of people meant to benefit from it, including those from whom Shelvocke had most to fear: Betagh, Hatley, Dodd, and Hendry, none of whom was allowed to keep a journal while under his command (Harris, 1.230; Betagh, 104). Clipperton might have given the most damning account of all, had he not died of alcoholism and a broken heart soon after reaching home. If Shelvocke were guilty of even half of what Betagh lays to his charge, then he proved a consummate exponent of the 'tu quoque', cleverly loading his enemies with the very guilt he deserved. The enigma of Shelvocke's voyage was current in maritime circles. Shortly before Captain Cheap shot and killed him on the coast of Patagonia, Henry Cozens (a midshipman on the 'Wager' in Anson's expedition) shouted at him, 'That he was come into those Seas to pay Shelvocke's Debts; and also insolently added, Tho' Shelvocke was a Rogue, he was not a Fool; and by G -- you are both' (Bulkeley, 40). Shelvocke's journal also reveals him to have been inclined to gout and corpulence, though even his enemies acknowledged his excellent seamanship. While capable of 'a winning address', he was 'not insensible of his own Merit' (Moore, 1.91). He died, according to a now destroyed memorial stone, in 1742, and was buried at St Nicholas's, Deptford. Shelvocke's 'Voyage' was reissued in 1757 by his son George, who was then secretary to the general Post Office. 


@@@@@


doc= 25321


Shenstone, William (1714-1763), writer, was born on 18 November 1714 at The Leasowes, the family farm on Mucklow Hill, north-east of Halesowen, then part of Shropshire, and baptized at Halesowen church on 6 December, the elder of two sons of Thomas Shenstone (1685/6-1724), son of William Shenstone of Lapull, and his wife, Ann Penn (1692/3-1732), eldest daughter of William Penn of Harborough Hall, Hagley, part of which estate Shenstone later inherited. According to Johnson, Shenstone developed an early enthusiasm for reading, and pestered members of his family for new books every time they went to market: 'It is said that when his request had been neglected, his mother wrapped up a piece of wood of the same form, and pacified him for the night' (Johnson, 348). He was taught initially by Sarah Lloyd, later to be the model for his 'School-Mistress', and attended Halesowen grammar school briefly before being taught by the Revd John Crompton at Solihull School. Here he met Richard Jago, a lifelong friend, correspondent, and fellow poet. Shenstone's father died in June 1724, aged thirty-eight, and his mother died in June 1732, aged thirty-nine; his grandmother managed the estate, but on her death he was placed under the guardianship of his uncle, the Revd Thomas Dolman of Broome, Staffordshire. 
In May 1732 Shenstone was admitted commoner at Pembroke College, Oxford; Johnson had already left, but Shenstone formed lasting attachments with Anthony Whistler and the future novelist Richard Graves, both at Pembroke. Jago went to University College. Shenstone made a point of wearing his own hair rather than a wig, thus incurring 'ill-natured remarks' in the various clubs which he and Graves frequented (Graves, 178). He studied 'mathematics, logic, natural and moral philosophy, and the other sciences usually taught in the university' (Graves, 23), and after four years wore the gown of a student of civil law, but spent most of his energy on poetry. From April 1736 he was listed as a BA in the college battels books, but he never claimed to have a degree. A large mulberry tree in the fellows' garden at Pembroke was known as 'Shenstone's tree'. About 1733 he wrote a small mock-heroic poem, 'The Diamond', but his first published volume was 'Poems upon Various Occasions' (1737), some copies of which are anonymous; it included an early version of 'The School-Mistress', the affectionate Spenserian parody for which Shenstone is chiefly remembered. He left Oxford in August 1739, but his name remained on the register at Pembroke until March 1742. 
From Oxford Shenstone initially returned to Harborough Hall, where Richard Graves spent a pleasantly indolent month's visit. Shenstone visited London and Bath, contributed to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', went to the theatre, and flirted with literary society. In 'The Judgement of Hercules' (1741), addressed to George Lyttelton, whom he supported at the Worcester election in 1741, he appears to choose the pursuit of active virtue and literary fame against the pleasures of slothful rural retirement, but most of the subsequent poetry reverses this decision. He revised 'The School-Mistress' (1742), doubling the poem's size, adding detail to the portrait of the strict but sympathetic country teacher, and enhancing his appreciation of Spenser's 'peculiar tenderness of sentiment' ('Advertisement'). The poem did not receive the reception Shenstone thought its due, and gradually his work took on a more reclusive, melancholic, and occasionally Gothic tone: by 1748 he had written twenty-six elegies, many of them in praise of introspective retreat from society. His 'A Pastoral Ballad, in Four Parts', later set to music by Thomas Arne, laments parting from an early love (the sister of his friend Richard Graves), though it was later rewritten for another romance, curtailed by lack of funds. In the early 1740s he also wrote a large number of songs and ballads, and humorous pieces. This work was later published, sometimes without formal permission, in the last three volumes of his friend Dodsley's influential 'Collection of Poems by Several Hands' (1748-58). 
In 1744 Shenstone withdrew to The Leasowes, where he had sometimes boarded with the tenant. He now set about turning the estate into a landscape garden, or 'ferme ornee', 'which he did with such judgement and such fancy as made his little domain the envy of the great and the admiration of the skilful: a place to be visited by travellers, and copied by designers' (Johnson, 350). He continued to agonize about his decision to abandon literary society, and to revise 'The School-Mistress', but his main energies went into diverting streams to create waterfalls, and clearing undergrowth to display 'natural' beauties from advantageous viewpoints. Shenstone showed his many visitors round the serpentine walks and surprise vistas in a careful routine; the garden was popular enough to engender a certain rivalry with Lyttleton's much bigger park at Hagley, and Shenstone sometimes complained that Lyttleton showed people round his garden the wrong way on purpose. The garden was filled with seats, urns, temples, and obelisks, many with inscriptions, in the structured form of picturesque contemplation made popular by the designer Batty Langley. Among the buildings were some designed by Sanderson Miller, and a number of fashionable Gothic 'ruins', one of which was made habitable for a tenant. 
Shenstone's mature years were saddened by ill health and the deaths of the poet James Thomson (1748), Shenstone's brother (1751), his cousin Mary Dolman (1754), Anthony Whistler (1754), and Lady Luxborough, the troubled sister of Viscount Bolingbroke with whom he had corresponded for many years (1756). He also found himself engaged in a lawsuit about the division of the Harborough property, which was eventually settled in 1758 after the intervention of Lord Stamford. Shenstone managed to establish new friendships with the printer John Baskerville, the critic Joseph Spence, and the industrialist Matthew Boulton. Otherwise he spent his time gardening, painting, playing music, and collecting 'objets d'art'. He confined his literary efforts to letters and to the assistance of friends like his bookseller Robert Dodsley, and Thomas Percy, whose 'Reliques of Ancient Poetry' owes much to Shenstone's literary taste. He also prepared an anthology of poems by his friends, which remained unpublished until 1952. 
Graves describes Shenstone as having 'a dull heavy look, unless when his features were animated by any sprightly sentiment, which rendered them extremely pleasing. His favourite dress was a plain blue coat and a scarlet waistcoat with a broad gold lace' (Graves, 25). Carlyle met him in 1758 and described him as 'a large heavy fat man, dressed in white clothes and silver lace, with his gray hairs tied behind and much powdered, which, added to his shyness and reserve, was not at first prepossessing'; but Carlyle reports that once Shenstone's 'reserve and melancholy' abated, he 'became good company' ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 388). Richard Graves included a cameo of Shenstone in 'The Spiritual Quixote' (1773), and the same author's 'Columella' (1779) is partly based on Shenstone's character. Some of his contemporaries, such as Walpole and Gray, thought the pose of retirement was affected in order to elicit curiosity or sympathy. 
Shenstone died at The Leasowes on 11 February 1763, 'of a putrid fever' (Johnson, 353), later rumoured to have been caused by sitting outside one night after an argument with his housekeeper (or mistress) Mary Cutler. The fever is more prosaically associated with Shenstone's return from a visit to Lord Stamford at Emville in connection with a government pension, for which Lord Loughborough had made application to Lord Bute. He was buried on 15 February in Halesowen churchyard, beside his brother Joseph (1722-1751), who had trained but never practised as an attorney; there is a memorial urn to him beside the north wall of the church with an inscription by Graves. Johnson suggests that the poet, whose income was about $300 a year, got himself into debt with extravagant works; he had perennial trouble in recovering his rents, and his 'The Progress of Taste' laments the disparity between his income and his ambitions. In his will Shenstone made provision for the payment of his debts by directing the sale of several small estates and houses. Dated a few days before he died, it bequeathes The Leasowes to his cousin John Hodgetts of Birmingham, for life, and thereafter to another cousin, Edward Cooke of Edinburgh, and his heirs, specifying that the property could be sold to friends such as the Hon. John Grey, son of Lord Stamford. Shenstone also left an estate at Quinton, Halesowen, and a house in Birmingham, to his cousin John Shenstone. There were several other sizeable bequests to relatives, friends, and servants. Mary Cutler received an annuity of $30. She later challenged the will on the grounds that back wages were unpaid, promises of recompense made by Shenstone had not been carried out, and the executors had failed to pay her specified legacies. 
Shenstone's garden continued to attract visitors (Goldsmith wrote an essay on it in 1773), but it was not carefully maintained. The house had been rebuilt by 1781; it is now the clubhouse for Halesowen golf course, which partly covers the garden. The rest of the 58-hectare estate is managed by Dudley metropolitan borough council, and is being restored according to Shenstone's designs. Shenstone had been planning a subscription edition of his works, but in the event Dodsley immediately set about publishing Shenstone's 'Works in Verse and Prose'. The poems constituted volume 1 (1764); 'Essays on Men, Manners, and Things', including influential essays on gardening, with a plan of The Leasowes and an enthusiastic description by Dodsley, appeared as volume 2 (1764); and a collection of Shenstone's letters to his friends made up volume 3 (1769). A scholarly edition of the letters was published by Marjorie Williams in 1939, but the poems, which were admired by Johnson, Burns, Hazlitt, and Ruskin, and reprinted many times into the nineteenth century, still lack a thorough modern edition. 


@@@@@


doc= 25322


Henry Chawner Shenton (bap. 1825, d. 1846), sculptor, was baptized at St Pancras Old Church, London, on 5 January 1825 and entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1843; he also studied in Rome. He was a pupil of the sculptor William Behnes. He exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1843 a group of Christ and Mary and in 1845 'The Penitent', an alto relievo; in 1844, at the Westminster Hall competition, a colossal group of 'The Burial of the Princes in the Tower'; and in 1845, also at Westminster Hall, a statue of Cranmer. Apparently Shenton worked under very difficult conditions, for his first group was: 'modelled in a stable with a roof so low that the ground had to be dug away to a depth of several feet, while the only light came through a narrow window in the wall, to the damps and chill of this fireless workroom his friends attribute the first insinuation of that disease which has laid the sculptor in an early grave. ('The Athenaeum', 1846, 72)' He died on 7 February 1846.His brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 25323


Shenton, Henry Chawner (bap. 1803, d. 1866), engraver, the son of John Shenton and his wife, Sarah, was baptized on 14 March 1803 at St Thomas's, Winchester, and moved to London in 1817. He became a pupil of Charles Warren, whose daughter Mary Ann he married on 9 March 1824. They had at least three children. Shenton was at first employed on small illustrations for books and annuals from designs by Thomas Stothard, Thomas Uwins, Richard Westall, Edward Corbould, and others, some of which he exhibited with the Society of British Artists between 1825 and 1832. For these early exhibits he is sometimes recorded as 'F. C. Shenton'. In 1825 he joined the Artists' Annuity Fund. 
Shenton engraved some works after old masters: in 1833, 'The Merry Fiddler', after J. Berkheydon, and 'A Jew Merchant', after Rembrandt; in 1834, 'Christ Reasoning with the Pharisees', after Leonardo da Vinci, which appeared in Allan Cunningham's 'Cabinet Gallery' in 1836; and later, in 1861, 'Death of Cleopatra', after Guido Reni, completed by Herbert Bourne for the 'Art Journal'. For the 'Art Journal's' series of plates from the Vernon gallery he engraved 'Country Cousins', after Richard Redgrave, in 1854, also published in 'The Vernon Gallery of British Art', ed S. C. Hall (3 vols., 1854). His portraits included historical figures as well as those of contemporaries: 'James V, King of Scotland', after Solomon A. Hart, was published in 1834 by Charles Tilt; 'William Allen', after Henry P. Briggs, followed in 1845; and 'The Earl of Zetland, M. W. Grand Master of English Freemasons', unattributed, was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1857. He executed some good plates on a larger scale, among them 'The Stray Kitten', after William Collins, and 'The Hermit', after Alexander Fraser. For 'Finden's Royal Gallery of British Art' (1838-49), he engraved 'A Day's Sport in the Highlands', after Abraham Cooper, and 'The Loan of a Bite', after William Mulready, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1858. He contributed one engraving, 'Olden Hospitality', after J. R. Robert, to Hall's 'Gems of European Art' (1846). Shenton's best-known plates are the three published by the Art Union of London: 'The Tired Huntsman', after Charles Landseer (1840); 'The Clemency of Coeur de Lion', after John Cross (1856), a painting entered for the Westminster Hall competition; and 'A Labour for Love', after T. F. Dicksee (1863); this last was completed by C. H. Jeens after the failure of Shenton's eyesight. Shenton also executed for the Art Union a set of outlines of incidents in English history, from designs by various artists, issued in 1847. The 'Art Journal' noted in 1866 that he was one of the last survivors of the able band of engravers in the pure line manner who had flourished during the first half of the century. Assessing Shenton's work, J. H. Slater later noted that 'their quality is... undoubted, and they should take a foremost place in any revival of interest in English line engraving of the period' (Engen, 177). He died suddenly at Camden Town on 15 September 1866. 
Shenton's eldest son, 
Living at the same addresses in London in Camden Town and Regent's Park as Shenton and his two sons was his daughter 


@@@@@


doc= 25324


William Kernot Shenton (1836-1878), was born in June 1836. He also became a sculptor and exhibited medallion portraits, including 'The Poet Schiller', at the Royal Academy from 1857 to 1871. For a time he taught drawing and modelling in the art school at the Crystal Palace. He died on 19 April 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 25325


Shepard, Thomas (1605-1649), minister in America, was born on 5 November 1605 at Towcester, Northamptonshire, the youngest child of William Shepard (died 1615), a grocer originally from the village of Fossecut, who married the daughter of a merchant, a Mr Bland, from whom he learned his trade. When Thomas was about four his mother died, and his father subsequently married a woman who would not accept the child his mother had described as 'her youngest and best beloved' (Albro, xiv). Following their father's death Shepard's elder brother John eventually took charge of him and saw to it that he continued to receive an education at the free school of Towcester, which prepared him for admittance as a pensioner to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 10 February 1620. Shepard graduated BA in 1624. 
Both disease and debauchery are said to have played roles in Shepard's spiritual awakening. At Cambridge he attended the preaching of several notable churchmen, and speaks with anguish of his dissolute behaviour and a lack of belief that caused him to veer from the contemplation of suicide to religious fervour. Under the preaching of John Preston, then master of Emmanuel College, Shepard entered into a profound religious conversion which led him finally to resolve to enter the ministry. Shepard describes his experience of hearing Preston preach: 'the Lord so bored my ears as that I understood what he spake and the secrets of my soul were laid upon [i.e., open] before me -- the hypocrisy of all good things I thought I had in me -- as if one had told him of all that ever I did, of all the turnings and deceits of my heart, insomuch as that I thought he was the most searching preacher in the world. And I began to love him much and to bless God I did see my frame and my hypocrisy and self and secret sins, although I found a hard heart and could not be affected with them. ('Autobiography', 44)' Anguish, and vacillation between assurance of salvation and fear of damnation, characterize Shepard's writings not only from this period but throughout a life troubled at the prospect that his beliefs and actions might ultimately prove unacceptable to God. He longed to know for certain whether he had won the eternal lottery, and this insecurity fired a lifetime of popular preaching and writing: 'It is a thousand to one if ever thou be one of that small number whom God hath picked out to escape this wrath to come. If thou dost not get the Lord Jesus to bear this wrath, farewell God, Christ, and God's mercy forever. ('The sincere convert', 'Works', 1.45)' From his time as a student at Cambridge, Shepard also struggled with the conflicting creeds of Calvinism, Arminianism, and a form of antinomianism known contemporaneously as Grindletonianism because of its association with Roger Brereley, minister in Grindleton, Yorkshire. 
Probably at the suggestion of John Preston, Shepard left Cambridge in 1626 to enter the tutelage of Thomas Weld, the vicar at Terling, Essex. In a parochial apprenticeship characteristic of the development of godly ministry in the Jacobean period, he was given both pastoral formation and practical training, and was introduced to a network of potential mentors and colleagues. At Terling Shepard came under the influence of Thomas Hooker, then preaching at Chelmsford. Both Weld and Hooker eventually preceded Shepard in emigrating to North America. Shepard's years at Terling proved to be formative and eventful; during them his vocation and theological identity were shaped as a member of the relatively close-knit circle of Essex ministers, often with ties to Emmanuel College, whose nonconformist sympathies shared at least a spiritual affinity with the Elizabethan puritan movement. 
Shepard proceeded MA in 1627, took deacon's orders at Peterborough on 12 July the same year, and was ordained priest the following day. After considerable deliberation with Weld, Hooker, and other godly ministers and leading lay persons, he accepted the invitation of the people of Earls Colne, near Coggeshall, Essex, to serve as their minister in a three-year lectureship endowed by a Dr Wilson and originally intended for the town of Coggeshall. He served at Earls Colne from 1627 to 1630, after which the people of the town pledged the sum of $40 per year to underwrite his lectureship. The lecture provided by Dr Wilson was moved, in part because of Shepard's influence, to his home town of Towcester, where Samuel Stone, another graduate of Emmanuel College, took up the charge. 
In the light of the affirmation of Earls Colne for his ministry, Shepard had determined to remain there. However, on 16 December 1630 he was summoned to London by Bishop William Laud, who silenced him and refused to allow him to exercise ministry in the diocese of London, according to Shepard, with the words, 'I will have no such fellows prate in my diocese' ('Autobiography', 51n.). Ironically, according to Shepard, until he was accused of nonconformity he had not made up his mind concerning the subject. Returning to Earls Colne, however, although he submitted to the bishop's injunction against teaching, Shepard came to 'see the evil of the English ceremonies, cross, surplice, and kneeling' (ibid., 52). When he appeared again before Bishop Laud the bishop instructed him to leave Earls Colne altogether. 
Shepard says in his autobiography that it was at this time that he and Weld began to consider going to New England. Before doing so they hoped to preach in Ireland and Scotland, but after a third encounter with Bishop Laud, Shepard took flight to Yorkshire, where he had been offered a position in a prominent household sympathetic to the plight of ejected godly ministers. He became the chaplain to the family of Sir Richard Darley in Buttercrambe, Yorkshire, where he met a cousin of Sir Richard, Margaret Touteville; they were married on 23 July 1632. Shortly thereafter Shepard received a call from a church in the Northumbrian town of Heddon, near Newcastle, but Bishop Thomas Morton of Durham, at the direction of Archbishop Richard Neile of York, refused him permission to preach publicly there. Nevertheless, Shepard explains that he 'preached up and down in the country', and in at least one private home, belonging to Mr Fenwick, until John Cotton, Thomas Hooker, Thomas Weld, and Samuel Stone emigrated from England ('Autobiography', 56-7). 
Under considerable official pressure, and without the support of these friends, Shepard decided also to sail for New England in October 1634. Following a failed Atlantic crossing, and (immediately after landfall) the death of their first child, Shepard and his wife remained in England for several more months, during which time a second child, Thomas Shepard (1635-1677), was born. On 10 August 1635 they sailed again, arriving in New England on 3 October. Two days later Shepard and his travelling companions settled in the colonial village of Newtown. His wife soon died there of tuberculosis contracted on the journey. 
Shepard made a significant contribution to the religious and educational life of the colonial settlement in Massachusetts. As minister of First Church, Newtown, perhaps in reaction to his own early temptations, he helped define puritan order and orthodoxy during the antinomian controversy of 1636-8, which eventually resulted in the expulsion from the colony of Anne Hutchinson, John Wheelwright, and their followers, and in the chastening of Shepard's old colleague, John Cotton. In contrast to Hutchinson's view that assurance of one's salvation cannot be obtained by contemplating one's own progress in righteousness, but is granted to the believer directly by the Holy Spirit, Shepard held that 'God made room for man's own striving within the larger framework of the divine initiative. God and man worked together in the process of salvation' (Hall, 18). As he wrote to Cotton, one cannot separate God's revelation in the Word (the 'Bible') from God's revelation in the Holy Spirit. Shepard worked out these themes in a series of sermons preached between 1636 and 1640, posthumously published in 1660 as 'The Parable of the Ten Virgins'. Although he might, like the saints, boast of hope in Christ, men should not 'sluggishly put all on Christ', while it is true, he asserts, that 'the mighty working of Christ that must conquer thy lusts; but must this put you to neglect striving?' ('Works', 2.250-51). 
Shepard was also instrumental in founding Harvard College in 1636, at which time the name of Newtown was changed to Cambridge, and in establishing the colonial plan for Congregational church government, the 'Cambridge Platform', of 1647. In 1637 Shepard married Joanna, daughter of Thomas Hooker; together they had two sons, Samuel ('b'. 1639) and John ('b'. and died 1646). Following Joanna's death in 1646, he married Margaret Boradel in 1647, with whom he had one son, Jeremiah, born in 1648. Shepard died in Cambridge on 25 August 1649 and was buried there; his third wife survived him. His influence on religious thought in the New World remained considerable, not least through the eighteenth-century colonial theologian, Jonathan Edwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 25326


Shepard, Thomas (1635-1677), Congregational minister in America, was born in London on 5 April 1635, the second son, and first surviving child, of Thomas Shepard (1605-1649) and his first wife, Margaret Touteville (died 1636). He emigrated with his parents from England to the Massachusetts Bay colony on 10 August 1635. His mother died in February 1636, the same month as he was baptized -- about 7 February -- into the church at Newtown (later Cambridge) of which his father had just been appointed the first pastor. Shepard graduated BA from Harvard College in 1653, and was chosen as a fellow of the college on 27 November 1654. He retained this fellowship until 15 September 1673, when he resigned during a controversy over the appointment of Leonard Hoar as president of the college. Shepard took up his fellowship again on 15 March 1674, the day Hoar resigned. 
Shepard married Hannah 
(or Anna; 1640-1709)
, daughter of William Tyng, a magistrate of the Massachusetts Bay colony, about 3 November 1656. They had two children: Thomas Shepard, born on 3 July 1658, who would succeed his father as a minister in the Charlestown, Massachusetts, church; and Anna, born on 13 September 1663. On 13 April 1659 Shepard was ordained a minister in the Charlestown church where he taught as a colleague of the Revd Zechariah Symmes. Shepard consistently represented what might be described as the conservative establishment interests in colonial religious politics. He was appointed a censor of the press on 19 October 1664. During the controversy over baptism in 1668, Shepard and Symmes stood with those who called for leaders among the Baptist congregations to be either exiled or imprisoned. 
In the 1672 Massachusetts annual election sermon Shepard spoke eloquently for a balanced view of toleration, saying: 'To tolerate all things, and to tolerate nothing, (it's an old and true Maxime) both are intolerable: but 'tis Satan's policy to plead for an indefinite and boundless toleration' (Sibley, 328). Shepard demonstrated his conception of a more appropriate toleration by praising an earlier generation of New England colonists for using their coercive powers to crush 'in the very Egg' the brood of 'poysonful, fiery, stinging Serpents' who threatened the religious purity of the church (Miller, 'The New England Mind', 132). As the historian Peter Carroll has observed: 'Thomas Shepard declared that the existence of doctrinal purity within the New England churches constituted a wall which separated... the saint from the sinner. By excluding the unregenerate, this shield defended the godly churches from the onslaught of disbelievers' (Carroll, 109). Toleration must, in Shepard's view, serve and be limited by the interests of ecclesiastical purity. 
Shepard's most important literary product, 'Eye-salve, or, A watch-word from our Lord Jesus Christ unto his churches: especially those within the colony of the Massachsets in New England, to take heed of apostacy' (1673), warned readers that God's protection of them in the perilous and isolated land of New England was jeopardized by the impurity of their faith. Building on his exposition of 'the Church of God' in the 'Old Testament', he writes: 'That the undeniable experience which the Covenant people of God have had of the Lord's being to them not a wilderness nor a land of Darkness, but the contrary, should caution them never to incur the guilt of so unreasonable a sin and dangerous folly, and provocation as to revolt from under the Lord, or to be unwilling to return again in case they have begun to decline from him. ('Eye-Salve', 8)' The themes Shepard touched upon in this book were common among contemporaries in the second generation of New England religious leadership, such as John Higginson, William Stoughton, Urian Oakes, and Increase Mather, reflecting, as the great historian of New England puritanism Perry Miller wrote, 'a deep disquietude' a fear that 'something has gone wrong' with their holy social experiment (Miller, 'Errand into the Wilderness', 2). 
Shepard, like his father, who took up the cause of the elders of the Massachusetts Bay colony against John Cotton and Anne Hutchinson in the antinomian controversy of 1636-8, was an energetic and courageous controversialist, praised posthumously by his friend Urian Oakes, in 'An Elegy upon the Death of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Shepard', as '
Our wrestling Israel, second unto none 

The man that stood i'th'gap, to keep the pass. 
(Miller and Johnson, 644)' Remembered primarily for his opposition to religious impurity, which he saw as a threat to the survival of the New England churches, Shepard died in Charlestown on 22 December 1677 at the age of forty-two, having contracted smallpox from a dying parishioner who had requested a pastoral visit. 


@@@@@


doc= 25327


Shepesheved, William (c.1270-c.1325), chronicler and Cistercian monk, presumably took his name from Shepshed in Leicestershire. The fact that he was ordained priest on 26 February 1295 suggests that he was then at least twenty-four years old, and that he was born about 1270. His surname was that of several other monks of Croxden Abbey, Staffordshire, where William was professed on 11 September 1288, and it is likely that at least some of these, including perhaps the Richard who became abbot in 1329, were his kinsmen. But all that is known for certain of William's family is that his mother was named Millicent -- he records her death in 1295. 
Shepesheved was the author of a chronicle preserved in BL, Cotton MS Faustina B.vi, folios 69-94. Largely concerned with the history of his monastery, it concludes with a list of the monks, continued by later hands. But it starts in 1066, well before the foundation of Croxden in 1178, and refers throughout to events elsewhere in Britain and beyond -- to the doings of English kings, to the crusades, and to the succession of popes. Consisting at first of little more than a series of notes, the chronicle becomes fuller as it approaches Shepesheved's own time. Though interesting in revealing that Shepesheved's political sympathies lay with Simon de Montfort and Thomas of Lancaster, the principal value of his chronicle lies in the light it sheds on the fortunes of Croxden, on the abbots and their deeds, particularly as builders, on relations with patrons, including a serious dispute with Thomas, Lord Furnival, in 1319, and on other aspects of monastic life. In 1313, for instance, Shepesheved tells how the monastery's great bell was accidentally broken, and how a founder from Lichfield failed expensively in his efforts to cast a replacement. He was also keenly interested in weather and meteorological phenomena, noting eclipses and other celestial apparitions, and also rainstorms, floods, and droughts, with their implications for harvests. In 1299 he observes that contrary to common expectations, heavy rain on St Swithun's day was followed by a beautiful summer. In the mid-1320s what is presumably Shepesheved's own hand is increasingly superseded by another, which is also responsible for a number of insertions on earlier folios. But although it may be assumed that Shepesheved died at about this time, the date is not recorded. Brief extracts from his chronicle were published by Dugdale in his 'Monasticon Anglicanum', more extensive ones by Frederic Madden in 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 25328


Shepheard, George (1770-1842), watercolour painter and engraver, was born on 26 January 1770 in Guildford, Surrey. He was the second of the four sons and a daughter of George Shepheard (1747-1820) and Jane, daughter of John Baxter. The Shepheards were descended from a branch of the old Herefordshire family of Wallwyn or Walwyn, which had been seated at Hellens, Much Marcle, near Ledbury, since the reign of Henry V. On the evidence of a caricature drawing dated 1793, formerly in the Williams collection (Williams, 147), it would appear that George Shepheard's parents had connections with East Sheen in Surrey. On similar evidence it would seem that he was a pupil of 'Dickenson', perhaps the mezzotint engraver William Dickinson, along with a lifelong friend, the painter and engraver Matthew Haughton, son of the enamel and still-life painter Moses Haughton. He also studied at the Royal Academy Schools from 31 December 1786, winning a silver medal in 1790. 
It is likely that another of Shepheard's friends from student days was John Field (1771-1841), the silhouettist, who may well have accompanied him when painting landscapes in Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Sussex. He probably visited Ireland about 1807 and Wales in the 1820s, and he was in France in April 1816. During the 1820s he also exhibited subjects from Somerset and Devon, Yorkshire, and Derbyshire. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1811 to the year of his death. The rustic figures that populate Shepheard's landscapes are good, as are his lively caricatures in pen and watercolour. As an engraver he produced mixed-media prints after Henry Bunbury and George Morland, and fifteen plates, 'Lady Hamilton's Attitudes', after Frederick Rehberg. In turn, George M. Brighty etched a set, 'Vignette Designs', after Shepheard's drawings. There is also a pencil portrait of James Northcote RA -- again from the Williams Collection -- in the National Portrait Gallery, London. 
Shepheard was twice married, first, on 1 March 1800, to Caroline Alexandria Anderson and second to Amelia Anderson, whose elder sister Augusta had married his elder brother Captain Lewis Shepheard RN (died 1838). There were three sons and three daughters of the first marriage and a son and daughter of the second. The eldest son, George ['see below'], and the third, Lewis Henry ('b'. 1816), became artists. The latter presumably had some hopes of succeeding to Hellens, since in 1881, along with several cousins, he took the surname of Wallwyn. George Shepheard died of dropsy on 7 September 1842 at 100 Guilford Street, London, his home since 1821. 




@@@@@


doc= 25329


George Wallwyn Shepheard (1804-1852), watercolour painter, travelled widely on the continent. In 1838 in Florence he married Laura Justina Parigi, with whom he had two children, Wallwyn Poyer Burnett Shepheard ('b'. 1840), a barrister, and Teresa Caroline ('b'. 1842). They each married a first cousin. G. W. Shepheard exhibited French and Italian views and free studies at the Royal Academy from 1837 to 1851 and lived in Bloomsbury. He died on 26 January 1852 at 5 Old Steyne, Brighton, of apoplexy and a diseased heart. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25330


Shepherd, Anthony (1721?-1796), astronomer, was born at Kendal, Westmorland, the elder son of Arthur Shepherd. Following his schooling at Kendal under Mr Towers, he was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, on 27 June 1740, at the age of nineteen. He received the degree of BA in 1744 and proceeded MA from Christ's College in 1747; he became a BD in 1761, and a DD in 1766. He was ordained in London on 23 February 1746 and held a long succession of livings -- vicar of Croxton, Norfolk (1756-8), vicar of Bourn, Cambridgeshire (1758-63), rector of Barton Mills, Suffolk (1763-82), canon of Windsor (1777-96), rector of Eastling, Kent (1782-96), and rector of Hartley Wespall, Hampshire (1792-6) -- while remaining throughout at Cambridge. 
Shepherd was a fellow of Christ's College from 1747 to 1783 and a tutor from 1752 to 1777. Previous biographers have criticized his laziness, but other indications that he was not greatly esteemed by the fellows of Christ's may explain some of the animosity towards him. Shepherd involved the college in a lawsuit which began in 1765 and dragged on until 1805, linked to his lease of the tithes of Burnham Westgate. When he became canon of Windsor in 1777 the college requested that he resign his fellowship. He declined, and from 1777 to 1781 the college continually sought to have the fellowship declared vacant. Such a declaration was among the first accomplishments of John Barker after his election as master in 1780; Shepherd himself had been a candidate to head the college. Despite some objections, Shepherd's fellowship finally ceased on 22 November 1783. 
Shepherd was elected Plumian professor of astronomy at the University of Cambridge in 1760 and FRS in 1763. In 1768 he was appointed master of mechanics to George III. He published several versions of 'The Heads of a Course of Lectures in Experimental Philosophy Read at Christ's College'. As Plumian professor he was a commissioner of the board of longitude, which published 'Tables for correcting the apparent distance of the moon and a star from the effects of refraction and parallax' (1772), to which he contributed a preface, including a brief history of the problem of determining longitude at sea; the tables themselves were calculated by others. In 1774 Captain Cook named a group of islands after his friend Shepherd. 
Shepherd was known to have an interest both in wine and in music. He bequeathed a number of astronomical and musical instruments, some by important makers, but his taste was not above criticism. A member of Christ's who had been involved in the calculation of the astronomical tables, with whom Shepherd may not have been on the best of terms, suggested that 'the Doctor did not shine more in music than he did in astronomy; and that he was not qualified to play the second Cremona in a concert' (Nichols, 6.678). Fanny, the daughter of his musical friend Dr Charles Burney, described Shepherd as 'dullness itself', also noting that he was 'prodigiously tall and stout' ('Early Diary', 1.284). His portrait, part of his bequest, is in the possession of the University of Cambridge. Shepherd, who never married, died at his house in Dean Street, Soho, London, on 15 June 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 25331


Shepherd, George Sidney (1784-1862), draughtsman and watercolour painter, was born on 5 December 1784 in Old Street, Finsbury, London, the son of George Shepherd, a watchcase maker, and his wife, Nancy Hosmer. He was baptized on 22 March 1785 at his parish church of St Luke's, Old Street. Shepherd's dates and life have long been somewhat unclear. Until the late twentieth century George Shepherd -- the present subject -- was understood to be the father of George Sidney Shepherd, whose monogram G.S.S. first appears on two careful monochrome wash drawings of Highgate about 1810. It is now thought that George and George Sidney were not father and son but the same person. Even though reconciling the separate signatures remains problematic and despite the fact that there are significant stylistic differences between their work, conflating these two men helps to explain various biographical discrepancies. The full signature 'George Sidney Shepherd' first appears on a watercolour of Smithfield Market of 1824, the year in which he similarly baptized his son Algernon Sidney Shepherd. It was also the period when his style began to develop from delicate, small-scale, and precise 'views' of places to larger-scale, more painterly, and impressionistic 'scenes' of life, an evolution which can be understood in relationship to the changing taste for topography and genre. The possibility that George Shepherd changed his professional name in order to mark distinctions in his work is reinforced by the parish records which show that he continued as George when registering the baptism of his eight children. 
Taking George Shepherd to be the youthful George Sidney helps to plot the events of this artist's career. Like his brother Thomas Hosmer ['see below'], who became a topographical draughtsman and drawing master, George showed talent early; by 1800 he had exhibited the first of many topographical views at the Royal Academy. During his late teens he also won silver palettes at the Society of Arts in 1803 and 1804 and may have mixed with other artists at Dr Cox Macro's sketching academy where there is a reference to a Mr Shepherd in 1806. Like the watercolour 'Tottenham Court Church' (1800), Shepherd's earliest subjects were all within striking distance of his home, off the City Road in rural Islington. By 1807, however, he began to travel further afield, going to Cambridge and Northampton to produce sketches for John Britton's 'Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain' in 1807. While his work for various publishers sent him to many areas of England, on 16 March 1812 Shepherd married Anna Sarah Lonnon ('b'. 1790, died before 1831) of Bedfordshire and this explains his trips and watercolours of that region. Despite his reputation as a metropolitan topographer, Shepherd's marked sympathy with rural and natural landscapes can be seen in a number of his watercolours including 'At East Acton' (1814) or his several scenes on the River Thames ('c'.1818-25). Doubtless Shepherd's greatest strength was in depicting the urban sphere and particularly London. He was an excellent topographical draughtsman who was able to express complicated perspectives and detailed architectural elevations in the many, deceptively simple, pen-and-wash drawings that he prepared for others to engrave. This can be seen to great effect in general works such as the 'European Magazine' as well as in J. Booth's 'Architectural Series of London Churches' (1818) or Robert Wilkinson's 'Londina illustrata' (1825-34), which was published to fuel the increasing fashion for images which depicted the ancient roots of the modern metropolis. 
Living on the outskirts of a bustling city, Shepherd evidently had an implicit understanding of urban life. Even in the most abbreviated lines he eloquently captured the humanity and humour that typified London life. This was consolidated in the second half of his career when he began to concentrate on these elements and seems to have sought recognition as a more painterly watercolour artist. Although he continued to favour scenes of London life, his views of Charing Cross, Hungerford Stairs, and demolition work near the Monument were executed in a larger format which gave him the opportunity to develop the genre and even caricature of these subjects. By the 1830s and 1840s he had expanded his palette and his technique; skies became more impressionistic and costumes more colourful. 
In 1832 Shepherd began exhibiting at the Society of British Artists and was a founder subscriber to the New Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1834. Because he worked less frequently for publishers after the 1840s the minutes of that society give the best sense of Shepherd's activities during this time. Despite being fined for non-attendance at their meetings in 1840 he was evidently still active as he also owed them money for selling paintings at their exhibitions. By 1859 his name no longer appears on their list of members and a begging letter from his son, of 5 November 1860, records why the twice-widowed and ailing Shepherd was no longer heard from. After suffering a stroke in March 1858, Shepherd ceased working and became increasingly ill and impecunious until his death in 1862. He was supported by the New Society of Painters in Water Colours who made their final donation to his cause on 3 February 1861. 
During his career Shepherd worked several times for the publishing magnate Rudolph Ackermann and it was under his auspices that he first collaborated with his younger brother 
Although Thomas Shepherd had no problems finding work as a topographical draughtsman, his real break came in 1826 when Jones & Co. commissioned a series of views of London's newest buildings, streets, and squares for engraving on steel and issuing as a part work. With its text by the architect James Elmes, 'Metropolitan Improvements' (1827) was principally received as a visual celebration of modern London. Such was the success of this publication that Jones & Co. capitalized on the formula with 'Modern Athens' (1828), a similar volume on Edinburgh, and another called 'Bath and Bristol... Displayed' (1829). Between 1826 and 1831 Jones & Co. 'appear to have monopolised Thomas Hosmer's pencil' (Phillips, 'Shepherd's London', 11) and during this time he produced about 450 plates by sketching on the spot, then working up finished wash drawings at home in his studio. However, as one surviving advertisement reveals, he also found time to offer his services as a drawing master, at his home in Chapman Street, Islington. 
Work for Jones & Co. did eventually dry up but it was definitely the cornerstone to Thomas Shepherd's later career. He was able to rework or reduce many of these designs for his next (rather more modest) project, 400 drawings for Charles Frederick Partington's 'Natural History and Views of London' (1835). Other London projects were soon forthcoming; Charles Knight commissioned thirty-four wood-engravings for his 'London' (1841-4) and Ernest Gambart published twenty-two coloured lithographs after Shepherd in his 'London in Miniature' (1854). The last major commission of his career was for sixteen drawings to illustrate 'Mighty London' (1855) where a thronging, fashionable, and cosmopolitan London was proudly positioned at the very heart of the empire. 
Although he found regular work providing topical and topographical images for the 'Illustrated London News', after 1842, Thomas Hosmer Shepherd was often drastically poor. Indeed, Thomas's lengthy relationship with Frederick Crace, the collector, was his saving. Between 1809 and 1859 Crace consistently commissioned him to make watercolours of specific London sites, buildings, and locations. Such was the renown of Crace's topographically organized, near-comprehensive, metropolitan collection that this led to further commissions for Shepherd. It is for this reason that many of his watercolours are known in multiple versions; the best version is usually in the Crace collection, now at the British Museum. Thomas's dependence on this patron is clear from the fact that his last dated drawing comes from five weeks before Crace's death on 18 September 1859. Five years later, on 4 July 1864, Thomas Hosmer Shepherd died in Islington. He was survived by two sons, Frederick Napoleon and Valentine Claude, who were both practising artists. 


@@@@@


doc= 25333


Sheppard, John (d. 1559?), composer, is of unknown parentage, family, education, and upbringing. At Michaelmas 1543 he was 'informator choristarum' at Magdalen College, Oxford, in succession to Thomas Preston, and he remained in office there until some time between Michaelmas (29 September) and Christmas 1547. Although master of the choristers, he was not also organist; nor was he a fellow of the college, nor did he kidnap or imprison choirboys as some modern accounts have held. The college accounts for 1546-7 show a payment of $8 to Sheppard for his stipend as master of the choristers, and in the same year he was reimbursed for books, vestments, and organ repair (35's'. 'pro duodecim libris, et eidem reparanti organorum vitia' and $3 'pro tribus cappis dalmaticis albis, per bursarios emptis ad festum Paschae'). He was paid 5's'. for music books at the end of 1547, at which point he was succeeded by one Mr Games. 
Sheppard became a member of the Chapel Royal between 1547 and 1553. Chapel Royal records list the gentlemen in order of joining, so his being the third of the twenty-three new members between 1547 and 1553 suggests that he entered earlier rather than later in this period, which would agree with his disappearance from the Magdalen records at the end of 1547. On 21 April 1554 he supplicated for the DMus degree of the University of Oxford, stating that he had studied music assiduously for twenty years and had composed much music; but this cannot have been granted, as he would undoubtedly have been given the title doctor in manuscript ascriptions of his music if so. At this time he also seems to have rekindled his contacts with Magdalen, being paid 20's'. on 15 December 1554 'pro quibusdam canticis' ('for certain songs'; Macray, 2.121). He was certainly based at court by then as he was domiciled at Westminster; the Jane Sheppard who was buried in the churchyard of St Margaret's, Westminster, on 9 April 1555 may have been his first wife. On new year's day 1557 he presented a roll of songs to the queen. Arrangements were made for livery for Mary's funeral (13 December 1558) and Elizabeth's coronation (15 January 1559) to be provided to him. However, during a severe visitation of epidemic disease in Westminster he had sketched an initial draft of his will on 1 December 1558, requesting burial in Westminster Abbey or, if leave were declined, in St Margaret's beside his first wife. His was a common name, and it is possible that he may be identified with the John Scheperde who was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 21 December 1558. Yet this supposition is not consistent with the expectation that he would be present at Elizabeth's coronation, if it may be believed that the official who drew up the list had up-to-date knowledge of the gentlemen. It is more likely that he died about the middle of January 1559, for his will was presented for probate on 31 January 1559. His request for burial in Westminster Abbey would probably not have been made without some understanding that it would be granted, while his second choice of St Margaret's may reflect his anticipation that by the time of his death the abbot and convent of Westminster would no longer be in charge of the abbey. That they were makes it very feasible that he was indeed buried there. 
Sheppard's draft will reveals that he had one child, Nathan, and a stepchild, Elizabeth; the former was old enough to assume certain financial responsibilities, while the latter was under age. She was the daughter of Sheppard's second wife, Elizabeth, whose first married name is thought to have been Clivigenne. Sheppard appointed Edmund Danyell as overseer of his will in respect of its provisions for his children. Danyell was subdean of the Chapel Royal and perhaps an Oxford colleague, having been at Merton College between 1540 and at least 1544. Nathan, sometimes appearing under the alias Chapman, later entered service as a schoolmaster with the Petre family of Ingatestone and Thorndon, Essex, a noted recusant family who also patronized William Byrd in the 1580s; he was still alive in 1611. Though not a rich man (his salary of $8 at Magdalen in 1547 compares unfavourably with the $10 paid some thirty years earlier to Thomas Ashwell at Durham), Sheppard was able to leave to Nathan an annuity out of which he was to pay his stepsister $4 and his stepmother $10 annually. To his wife Sheppard left the residue of his estate, and to his son the manor of Dean in the parish of St John, Margate, granted (in reversion) jointly to Sheppard and his Chapel Royal colleague Richard Edwards by Queen Mary on 13 July 1558. 
Sheppard's early death is a profound loss to music, and the importance and brilliant quality of his compositions are now fully accepted. Most of his surviving music is for the pre-Reformation service and comes from the extensive collections copied mainly between 1575 and 'c'.1581 by John Baldwin, a lay clerk at St George's, Windsor, from 1575 and later a gentleman of the Chapel Royal. The extreme familiarity shown by Baldwin towards Sheppard's name in his ascriptions (he sometimes simply calls him 'S') and the high proportion of works by Sheppard in these collections, made at least fifteen years after his death when there was no longer any liturgical occasion in the established church for their performance, suggest the esteem in which he was held by a fellow professional. Elsewhere, another indication of contemporary opinion appears against his gradual 'Haec dies', which is described in one partbook as 'a goode songe excellent good song fyne' (BL, Add. MS 30484, fol. 8) and in another as 'the best songe in England' (BL, Add. MS 30480, fol. 68'v'). 
Sheppard's music is characterized by a punchy contrapuntal style in which simple points of imitation enter very quickly. For example, in the respond and prose 'Gaude gaude gaude Maria virgo' all six voices enter within four beats, giving an impression of contrapuntal imitation even though not all of them are entirely imitative. The variety of sound is well illustrated in the prose section of this work, 'Inviolata', where he changes the texture by dropping alto and tenor and dividing both treble and mean voices, thus placing the emphasis on the higher part of his overall vocal range. His two settings of 'Libera nos, salva nos' (strictly a matins antiphon for Trinity Sunday, but at Magdalen College this text was recited twice daily with the verse 'Benedicamus patrem', a usage that surely connects at least these works with Magdalen rather than the Chapel Royal) again highlight the treble voices, with intricate rippling counterpoint crowning the slow-moving plainsong, or faburden, in the bass. Elsewhere his contrapuntal technique is even more enterprising: at 'Media nocte' in another respond, 'Audivi vocem de coelo', the four voices enter on succeeding pitches of the scale, down a seventh or up a ninth from the previous entry, a technique rarely found and never, as here, based on the plainsong. When a voice breaks off before a new point of imitation it does so only briefly and resumes (again in close proximity to other entries) without more ado, and so, since all the voices are so quickly brought in, it follows that the sound is full and the urgency is marked. On the other hand, Sheppard uses a melismatic style at the ends of phrases, once most of the text has been declaimed. In his mass 'Cantate' his assured handling of the six-part free contrapuntal texture, largely unconstrained by a 'cantus firmus', shows the new direction that Latin music might have taken. 
Sheppard's hymns follow the normal layout of the time, with plainsong and complex polyphony alternating verse by verse. His flexibility of scoring is particularly noticeable here, for succeeding verses are occasionally set to quite different combinations. In 'Sacris solemniis', which is in up to eight parts, he sometimes divides the treble and the mean voices briefly into two, as if he is so bursting with potential contrapuntal entry points that he does not have enough voices for them all. In most of the hymns the tune is prominent at the top of the texture and there are distinct settings for each verse, which is an early example of variation, a technique just beginning to appear in England in the keyboard music of his fellow gentleman of the chapel Thomas Tallis. 
Much of Sheppard's composition for the vernacular services of the Edwardian books of common prayer well illustrates the way in which composers at the beginning of the Reformation applied the values implicit in the so-called Lincoln Cathedral injunctions of April 1548; these reflect one of the chief aims of the English Reformation, to make the liturgy better understood, and state that composers should select and translate the best texts 'settyng therunto a playn and distincte note, for every sillable one'. His anthem 'I give you a new commandment' is typical, being written in syllabic style, though with imitative counterpoint, in a simple ABB form. Yet one of his most elaborate works for the English rite is his 'second' service ('Magnificat' and 'Nunc dimittis'), which, especially towards the ends of phrases, has a complex and contrapuntal note for every syllable several, much like his Latin music. This sophisticated and confident work must date either from the early days of composition in English, before 1553, or from the beginning of Elizabeth's reign, when she anticipated restoring the 1549 prayer book. If the latter, however, it would need to have been written in little more than a month by a man who may have been mortally ill. The basic texture is in five parts, dropping to four when the two sides of the choir (decani and cantoris) alternate, but then Sheppard achieves up to eight real parts by considerable dovetailing as one side of the choir continues its phrase after the other has commenced the next. The assured word-setting, with its characteristic capture of the internal rhythms of the text, if necessary at the expense of the strong beats, is also indicative of the increasing confidence with which he and his generation approached the vernacular. Indeed, on many occasions in this work there are pre-echoes of Byrd's 'great' service in the rhythms, and even sometimes the shape, of the imitative points. While the beginning of the phrase at, for example, 'and to be the glory of thy people Israel' ('Nunc dimittis') is plain, distinct, and syllabic, Sheppard treats the imitative point at length: there are no fewer than twelve entries of the point. 
Only one significant example of Sheppard's secular work survives, 'O happy dames', in a keyboard arrangement with just the opening title, but the text by Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, can be fitted easily; sacred vernacular 'contrafacta' also survive for this work, 'I will give thanks' and 'O happie man if thou repent', though the Howard poem is the more likely original. 
In addition to Baldwin's approbation, Sheppard was known, at least by repute, to Thomas Morley, who in his 'Plaine and Easie Introduction to Practicall Musicke' (1597) includes Sheppard with his peers as one of the 'famous Englishmen' skilled in composition. In the eighteenth century Burney and Hawkins both noticed him, but did not select his best works for discussion. Sheppard's music was little known during the early years of the twentieth century, although scholarly performers such as Alexander Ramsbotham, R. R. Terry, and H. B. Collins were discovering and performing it in the 1920s and 1930s. His work was to have been included in the second series of 'Tudor Church Music', which never appeared because of funding difficulties. In 1958 his music was particularly prominent in F. Ll. Harrison's important study 'Music in Medieval Britain', and in the 1960s scholars and performers of Sheppard's old Oxford college, Magdalen, led the way towards a thoroughgoing assessment of his work, both in print and in sound, establishing him without doubt as one of the major figures of the sixteenth century. 
So it is for its exceptionally interesting sounds and concise counterpoint that Sheppard's music is valued today: he knew his choir and the effects it could achieve and he handled it perfectly and with subtlety. The beauty of the sound he creates is the result of contrapuntal skill, combined with great flexibility of scoring within the overall twenty-three-note compass characteristic of English choirs of this period. His works are among the outstanding masterpieces of sixteenth-century music. 


@@@@@


doc= 25334


Shepherd, John (1759-1805), Church of England clergyman, son of Richard Shepherd of Goderthwaite, Cumberland, was born early in January 1759 in Beckermet in Cumberland, and baptized at St Bridget's Church there on 7 January. His parents both died when he was young and his upbringing was entrusted to a guardian, John Benson, of Egremont, Cumberland. In 1783 he was to marry his guardian's niece, Frances Benson. He went to school at Arthuret, near Longtown, and then to university at Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1777, graduated BA in 1781, and proceeded MA in 1787. He took deacon's orders in 1782 and was ordained priest in 1783. In 1785 he was made perpetual curate of Paddington, Middlesex. There he made and renewed several scholarly connections, notably John Boucher, Dr Samuel Glasse, and the Bampton lecturer Dr William Barrow. One of Shepherd's concerns was the adequacy of the church building for, according to a memoir of Shepherd published by his daughter Eliza in 1817, 'the old church of Paddington was much too small for the accommodation of so populous a parish; and in a condition so ruinous as to endanger the lives of the few who could attend it' (Shepherd, 2). Some local opposition notwithstanding, the church was rebuilt through Shepherd's exertions between 1788 and 1791 and consecrated on completion by Beilby Porteus, bishop of London. 
In 1797 Shepherd brought out the first volume of his 'Critical and Practical Elucidation of the Book of Common Prayer'. It was favourably received; the first edition was exhausted before the second was ready for the press. He received many letters of congratulation, including one from George Pretyman Tomline, William Pitt's former tutor and bishop of Lincoln, to whom a later (1817) edition of the 'Elucidation' was dedicated (the first had been dedicated to Porteus). They did not bring material fortune to the author of the 'Elucidations', however, as Shepherd's daughter Eliza noted in her memoir: 'The general expression of approbation that met his first appearance as Author was the chief if not the only reward of this labour. Habitual inattention to pecuniary concerns, and the too great liberality with which he gave away nearly as many copies as were sold, precluded the possibility of much emolument. (Shepherd, 3)' Shepherd had thirteen children and must have hoped for the incumbency of Paddington when it fell vacant with the death of Archdeacon Hayter in 1799; but it had already been promised elsewhere. In the summer of 1801 he was instead offered the curacy of Pattiswick in Essex and still in the London diocese of his patron Porteus, who indeed paid his removal expenses there. He resided nearby at Stisted. His health was not good and the atmosphere apparently not favourable. Two of his daughters predeceased him. His own self-remedial methods of dealing with a cold may have hastened his end. He died at Stisted on 2 May 1805. His body was taken to Paddington for burial in the new churchyard there. At the time of his death he was engaged on a third volume of the 'Elucidation', to cover the litany, but it was never published. A fifth edition of the first volume and a fourth of the second appeared in 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 25335


Shepherd, Luke (fl. 1548), protestant propagandist, was born in Colchester, Essex. Personal details other than his birthplace, occupation, and London address are not known. John Bale called him 'Lucas Opilio' (a Latinized form of his name), considered him 'a most elegant poet, not at all inferior to Skelton', and declared his works 'full of suitable jests and exercises of wit' (Bale, 'Cat.', 2.109). Shepherd's anonymous works were printed in London in 1548, primarily by John Day, and include eight verse satires and one satiric prose tract. All except 'Pathose, or, An Inward Passion of the Pope for the Losse of hys Daughter the Masse' are listed by Bale in his catalogue. Bale also ascribed a translation of the psalms, now lost, to Shepherd. Thomas Warton referred to these psalms and suggested that 'one or two of Shepherd's pieces in prose' were among Bishop Tanner's books at Oxford (Warton, 3.316). Subsequently, Joseph Ritson stated that Shepherd 'versify'd certain psalms' and wrote 'many other little things' (Ritson, 330-31). However, neither of these claims regarding additional texts can be substantiated. Andrew Maunsell listed several of Shepherd's satires anonymously in his bibliography. 
Shepherd is identified by a contemporary, Edward Underhill, as his friend 'mr. Luke', a physician of Coleman Street and author of 'many proper bokes agaynst the papistes' (Nichols, 171-2) including the verse dialogue, 'John Bon and Mast Person' which attacks the real presence and the feast of Corpus Christi. Underhill recounted the story of its printer, John Day, who was summonsed before the lord mayor of London, Sir John Gresham, to disclose the name of the anonymous author of this work which had been reported to him as seditious. Day avoided going to prison for printing this satire only because Underhill happened to be a dinner guest at Gresham's house when Day was sent for. Underhill had a copy of Shepherd's poem with him which he gave to the mayor, informing him it was in circulation and much admired at court. Gresham promptly 'reade a little off it, and laughed thereatt, as it was bothe pythye and mery', and subsequently dismissed Day without charge (Nichols, 172). 
Shepherd was imprisoned in the Fleet for his anti-papist writings, according to both Underhill and John Strype, but their accounts do not provide any proof or particulars. No other contemporary details of Shepherd's life are known. It is possible he was recruited to write anti-Catholic satires by a protestant patron, but there is no evidence of such patronage or any other political connections. There is no indication as to when or where he died, and no will has been found. 
Shepherd was one of the main writers of the polemical propaganda printed in London in the first two years of Edward VI's reign. His satires criticize the Roman church's pontiff, clergy, and ideology. 'Pathose', 'A Pore Helpe', and 'The Upcheringe of the Messe' all attack the Catholic mass. 'Antipus', 'The Comparison betwene the Antipus and the Antigraph', and 'John Bon and Mast Person' are concerned primarily with the doctrine of transubstantiation. 'Doctour Doubble Ale' derides Catholic doctrines and clergy. 'Phylogamus' denounces clerical celibacy and those writers who support its practice. 'Cauteles Preservatory Concerning the Preservation of the Gods which are Kept in the Pixe' is a satiric prose work against the sacrament of the altar. 
In addition to dealing with general issues of the Reformation, Shepherd also engaged in personal attacks on specific conservative figures, especially churchmen and writers. Contemporary subjects of Shepherd's satires include Bishop Stephen Gardiner, Henry George, Miles Hogarde, William Layton, Sir John Mason, and Dr Richard Smith. 


@@@@@


doc= 25336


Shepherd, Richard (1731/2-1809), Church of England clergyman and theological writer, was baptized on 10 October 1732 at Mareham-le-Fen, Lincolnshire, the son of Henry Shepherd (died 1764), vicar of that parish, and his wife, Susanna. He matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 1 December 1749 at the age of seventeen. He graduated BA (1753), MA (1757), BD (1765), and DD (1788), and was elected probationary fellow of his college in 1760. After considering a military career he took orders in the Church of England and eventually was appointed chaplain to Thomas Thurlow, bishop of Lincoln and later of Durham; Thurlow's nomination gained Shepherd the archdeaconry of Bedford in July 1783. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in May 1781, and in 1788 he was Bampton lecturer at Oxford. In 1792 he was instituted to the rectory of Wetherden and Helmingham in Suffolk by Lord Chancellor Thurlow, brother of the bishop, and he held these preferments until his death. 
Shepherd published a wide selection of writings, including poetry and drama, although he came to concentrate on theology. His poetry was not unsuccessful: his 'Ode to Love' (1755?) was reprinted in 1760 and 'The Nuptials' (1761) went into three editions. Most of his poetic and dramatic pieces were included in the two-volume 'Miscellanies' (1776). Several of Shepherd's theological works went into two or more editions, including his response to Soame Jenyns in 'The Review of a Free Enquiry' (1759), 'The Requisition of Subscription to the Thirty-Nine Articles' (1771), and 'Reflections on the Doctrine of Materialism' (1779), addressed to Joseph Priestley. Shepherd published regularly throughout his life; his last piece was 'No False Alarm, or, A Sequel to Religious Union' (1808). He died at the parsonage at Wetherden on 3 January 1809. No details are known of his wife, with whom he had a son, Henry, born in 1792. 


@@@@@


doc= 25337


Shepherd, Richard Herne (1840-1895), bibliographer, born at 20 Marlborough Square, Chelsea, on 5 April 1840, was a younger son of Samuel Shepherd FSA (1798/9-1856), and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Dyer. His grandfather Richard Herne Shepherd (1775-1850) was from 1818 to 1848 a well-known revivalist preacher at the Ranelagh Chapel, Chelsea, and published, besides sermons and devotional works, a volume of verse entitled 'Gatherings of Fifty Years' (1843). 
The younger Richard was educated largely at home, developed a taste for literature, and in 1858 published verses entitled 'Annus moriens'. In 1861 he issued an essay on 'The School of Pantagruel', in which he traced 'Pantagruelism' in England from the earl of Rochester to Laurence Sterne. Subsequently he edited booksellers' editions of the classics, including Blake's 'Poems' (1868 and 1874), Shelley's 'Poems' (1871), Charles Lamb's 'Poetry for Children' (1872 and 1878), Chapman's 'Works' (1873), Lamb's 'Works' (1875), Ebenezer Jones's 'Poems' (1879), Poe's 'Works' (1884), Dickens's 'Speeches' (1870), Dickens's 'Plays and Poems' (1885), and Shelley's 'Prose Works' (1888). In 1869 he published 'Translations from C. Baudelaire with a Few Original Poems' (reissued 1879); in 1873 he printed, with notes, Coleridge's forgotten 'Osorio: a Tragedy', and in 1875 'The Lover's Tale' (of 1833) and other early uncollected poems of Tennyson, unearthed from albums and periodicals. Fifty copies were privately printed in 1875, but the volume was suppressed by injunction in the court of chancery. In 1878 he published Elizabeth Barrett Browning's 'Earlier Poems' without the assent of the writer's living representatives, who warmly resented his action. Continuing his career as a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles, he prepared editions in the same year of the juvenilia of H. W. Longfellow and Moore; and 'Sultan Stork', a volume of early pieces by W. M. Thackeray, in 1887. In 1878 there also appeared an agreeable confection of biographical and bibliographical gossip in his 'Waltoniana'. The following year Shepherd obtained $150 damages from the 'Athenaeum' newspaper for an 'injurious review' of his revised edition of Lamb's 'Poetry for Children'. In 1881 he published a dull 'Memoir of the Life and Writings of Thomas Carlyle', some passages of which had to be cancelled. 
Meanwhile Shepherd studied modern bibliography, preparing bibliographical accounts of Ruskin (1879), Dickens (1880; rev. edn, 1885), Thackeray (1881; rev. 1887 and appended to 'Sultan Stork'), Carlyle (1881), Swinburne (1883, 1884, and 1887), and Tennyson; the last-named was published posthumously in 1896, as an expansion of Shepherd's earlier 'Tennysoniana' (1866, and 1879). Some of these works were published by Shepherd's brother, who, under the name of Frank Hollings, ran a bookshop in Holborn. 
Shepherd was a heavy drinker and lived for many years at the Bald-faced Stag, an inn in Putney. A vivid impression of him is given by W. Partington, who described him as: 'a tall angular man, often shabbily dressed, with shoulders rounded from long nights of poring over books. He was remarkable for the possession of a most beautiful voice and gentle manners. One of his idiosyncrasies was his persistence in walking always in the middle of the street -- in defiance of the shouting and gesticulating jehus of London's cabs... (Partington, 200)' Shepherd died in Camberwell House Lunatic Asylum, London, on 15 July 1895. At the time of his death he was preparing a bibliography of Coleridge for 'Notes and Queries', to which he was a frequent contributor. 
Shepherd's editorial work was extensive but more notable for dogged perseverance than discrimination. However, he never descended to forgery as was falsely alleged, long after his death, by T. J. Wise. 


@@@@@


doc= 25338


Shepherd, Sir Samuel (1760-1840), lawyer and politician, was born on 6 April 1760, the son of Henry Shepherd, a jeweller and toy maker of 85 Cornhill, London, a friend of Garrick, and a dabbler in poetry. Shepherd attended the Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1773 to 1774, and was then at a school at Chiswick, probably that of Dr William Rose. In July 1776 he was entered at the Inner Temple, where he became pupil of Serjeant Charles Runnington, who married his sister Anna Maria in 1777. On 23 November 1781 he was called to the bar. On 1 January 1783 he married Elizabeth White (died 1833), daughter of John White of Hick's Hall, St Sepulchre, Middlesex, who was pronounced 'fine and figety' by Sir Walter Scott. 
Shepherd went the home circuit, and soon acquired a considerable practice both on circuit and in the court of common pleas. He earned the praise of lords Mansfield and Kenyon. Thomas Erskine became his travelling companion during the vacations. From about 1790 he began to suffer from progressive deafness. In 1793 he declined the dignity of king's counsel, but he was created serjeant-at-law in Easter term 1796, and in the following Trinity term became king's serjeant. On the death of Serjeant Cockell he rose to be king's ancient serjeant. 
As regent, the prince of Wales made Shepherd his solicitor-general in June 1812, and in December 1813 he was appointed solicitor-general to the crown following a warm recommendation from Lord Ellenborough. He was knighted on 11 May 1814, and in the spring of 1817 was made attorney-general. From 11 April 1814 to June 1819 he sat for Dorchester in parliament, where he was effective in the transaction of legal business on behalf of Lord Liverpool's administration, and in rebuffing opposition attacks. In the law courts his chief cases were the prosecution of the radical publishers James Watson (in June 1817) and Richard Carlile, the latter for publishing Paine's 'Age of Reason'. 
By common consent Shepherd was a sound lawyer, who but for his deafness would have risen higher in his profession. He refused the two offices of chief justice of the king's bench and of the common pleas in 1818, partly owing to his deafness, and partly because he had made up his mind not to accept a judicial office that involved the trial of prisoners. The objection did not apply to the post of lord chief baron of the court of exchequer in Scotland, which he held from June 1819 to February 1830. While in Scotland he sat on the bench with Scottish judges to assist them with the application of English law in treason trials arising out of the radical insurrection there in 1820. He was raised to the privy council on 23 July 1819. 
After suffering some initial suspicions from Scottish lawyers, Shepherd became popular in Edinburgh society, and was a close friend of Sir Walter Scott, who said of him: 'There is a neatness and precision, a closeness and truth in the tone of his conversation, which shows perfect good humour... with a little warmth of temper on suitable occasions. His great deafness alone prevented him from being Lord Chief Justice. I never saw a man so patient under such a malady. (Lockhart, 8.152)' With his friend William Adam, lord chief commissioner of the jury court, Shepherd presented in 1834 to the Bannatyne Club, of which they were members, a volume of the ragman rolls (1291-6). Shepherd was also a member of the Blair-Adam Club, of which William Adam and Sir Walter Scott were leaders, and joined in the club's annual excursions. Scott once commented that Shepherd had 'too much English figettiness about him for rocks and precipices perpetually afraid that rocks would give way under his weight' ('Letters', 6.466). 
Ill health forced Shepherd to resign his post in 1830, when he retired, amid his own regrets and those of his Edinburgh friends, to a cottage at Streatley in Berkshire, where he owned a small property. For the last three years of his life he was blind. He died at Streatley on 3 November 1840, and was buried in the churchyard there, where a monument was erected to his memory. 
Shepherd's widow died at Hyde Park Terrace, London, on 24 March 1833, aged seventy-four. Their son Henry John Shepherd (1783?-1855), bencher of Lincoln's Inn (KC 1834), recorder of Abingdon, and commissioner of bankrupts, was author of 'A Summary of the Law Relating to the Election of Members of Parliament' (1825; 3rd edn, 1836) and of 'Pedro of Castile', a poem (1838). He died at Caversham, near Reading, on 21 May 1845 ('GM', 2nd ser., 44, 1855, 108). His wife, whom he married on 11 April 1808, was Lady Mary (1777-1847), the second daughter of Neil Primrose, third earl of Rosebery, and the author of three philosophical treatises ['see 'Shepherd, Lady Mary (1777-1847)]. Sir Samuel's niece Sarah Garay Thomas was the first wife of his intimate friend John Singleton Copley (afterwards Lord Lyndhurst). 


@@@@@


doc= 25339


Thomas Hosmer Shepherd (1793-1864) in 1813. Together they prepared a series of street views for Ackermann's 'Repository of the Arts' where Thomas had already published his view of the East India House in 1809. Although the interests and skills of the two brothers certainly overlap, Thomas was less interested in antiquarian themes. In 1816 he designed a series of six London street scenes whose detail and vivacity characterized his 'oeuvre'. Despite a reputation built upon depicting a variety of modern, fashionable cities Thomas Hosmer showed a similar skill with nature. He made his first sketching tour aged seventeen and as the illustrations in Thomas Rose's 'Westmorland' (1832) or William Gray Fearnside's 'Views of the Rhine' (1832) demonstrate this was followed by several others. Due to the existence of a watercolour of the site of a former Napoleonic encampment at Boulogne it also appears that Thomas visited France in 1818 and it is thought that this was by way of a honeymoon with his new bride, Jane Maria ('b'. 'c'.1797, died in or after 1864). Perhaps the trip left the couple with especially fond memories; in June 1819 they named their first born, the artist, Frederick Napoleon Shepherd (1819-1878). 


@@@@@


doc= 25340


Shepherd, William (1768-1847), Unitarian minister and politician, was born in Liverpool on 11 October 1768, the son of William Shepherd (died 1772), master cordwainer, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1787), daughter of Benjamin Mather (died 1749), dissenting minister of Over Darwen. The older William Shepherd, a burgess and active politician, died in 1772. Elizabeth Shepherd's brother, Tatlock Mather (died 1785), minister of a Unitarian congregation at Rainford, near Prescot, took over responsibility for the impoverished family. William was educated at Holden's academy near Rainford from 1776 to 1782, by the Revd Philip Holland (1721-1789) in Bolton in 1782-5, at the dissenting academy at Daventry from 1785 to 1788 under Thomas Belsham (1750-1829), and at New College, Hackney, from 1788 to 1790 under Belsham, Andrew Kippis (1725-1795), and Richard Price (1723-1791). 
In 1790 Shepherd became tutor to the sons of the wealthy Revd John Yates (1755-1826) of Toxteth Park Chapel, Liverpool, and there made the acquaintance of William Roscoe (1753-1831), who greatly influenced his tastes and character. In 1791 he became minister of the Unitarian chapel at Gateacre, near Liverpool, and the next year, on marrying Frances (died 1829), daughter of Robert Nicholson, merchant of Liverpool, moved to the old parsonage, The Nook, at Gateacre. There were no children. Shepherd opened a very successful school; some sense of the substance and method of his teaching can be gathered from 'Systematic Education', which he published in 1815 with two other prominent Unitarians, Lant Carpenter (1780-1840) and Jeremiah Joyce (1763-1816); it is a compendium of principles derived ultimately from David Hartley (1705-1757) and Joseph Priestley (1733-1804). 
An enthusiast for civil and religious liberty, Shepherd went to London in May 1794 to visit Joyce, a friend from his years in Hackney, who had been committed to the Tower on a charge of treason. Five years later, when the Revd Gilbert Wakefield (1756-1801) was sentenced to two years' imprisonment, Shepherd visited him in Dorchester gaol and took charge of his son and eldest daughter. On 27 May 1796 he became a Liverpool burgess by inheritance; an eloquent speaker, he took an active part in municipal affairs as an advanced liberal. Although he had been critical of the 'Edinburgh Review' in its early years, he became a close friend of one of its founders, the first Lord Brougham (1778-1868), and the extensive political correspondence between them is of considerable importance. 
Meanwhile, Shepherd devoted himself to writing. His interest in Italian literature, aroused by Roscoe, led in 1803 to a 'Life of Poggio Bracciolini', which was well received and translated into French, German, and Italian. In 1807 he edited for private circulation Bracciolini's 'Dialogus an seni sit uxor ducenda'. The published letters of his two visits to Paris in 1802 and 1814 are of interest, and a volume of original and translated poems appeared in 1829. On 10 July 1834 the University of Edinburgh conferred on him the degree of LLD. His pedagogical, political, and literary activity led to comparative neglect of the pulpit; he wrote few new sermons, choosing rather to preach those of others, with repetitions sufficiently well spaced to allow for congregational forgetfulness. 
In 1801 Thomas De Quincey (1785-1859), then sixteen, was befriended by the Liverpool circle of whom Shepherd, Roscoe, and Dr James Currie (1756-1805), physician and editor of Robert Burns, were the most prominent members. A quarter of a century later, De Quincey contemptuously dismissed their literary accomplishments and their pretension ('Tait's Edinburgh Magazine', 4, 1837, 70-73). While recognizing Shepherd's uprightness and patriotism, De Quincey deplored his 'coarseness' and his disrespectful wit, presumably shown in the attacks De Quincey remembered on Anglican churchmen and on Hannah More. Shepherd replied pointedly and with dignity ('Tait's', 340) to this cruel elaboration of an old memory, which had given much offence in Liverpool. But, allowing for youthful priggishness, De Quincey's observations were not entirely without foundation. Shepherd had a rollicking sense of humour, which was readily turned on people and political positions he detested. Moreover, he had little sympathy for fashionable currents of thought towards the end of his long life: in 1834, in a letter to Brougham (10 Aug 1834; University College, London, Brougham MS 14831) he noted that 'that useless proser Coleridge is gathered to his fathers'; the young Coleridge had, of course, been an enthusiastic Unitarian, and the later Coleridge was simply incomprehensible to him. 
After Frances Shepherd's death on 17 November 1829, the management of his household passed to his adopted child, Hannah, the youngest daughter of his old friend Jeremiah Joyce. Shepherd died at Gateacre on 21 July 1847, and was interred in the burial-ground of the chapel. His fine library was sold in Liverpool in December 1848. A marble tablet in the chapel, with an inscription by Lord Brougham, was erected in 1850, and is surmounted by a marble bust by Isaac Jackson of Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 25341


Sheppard, Elizabeth Sara (1830-1862), novelist, was born in Blackheath, Kent, the daughter of John Sheppard, a graduate of St John's College, Oxford, and a Church of England clergyman who was of Jewish descent on his mother's side. Her father died young, without leaving provision for his family; upon his death, her mother opened a school. An accomplished linguist in Greek, Latin, Hebrew, French, and German, Sheppard was also a capable musician, and taught music in her mother's school. 
At the age of sixteen Sheppard began her first novel, 'Charles Auchester'. She sent the manuscript to Benjamin Disraeli, who forwarded it to his publisher and wrote to Sheppard: 'No greater book will ever be written upon music, and it will one day be recognised as the imaginative classic of that divine art' ('Atlantic Monthly', Oct 1862, 499). It was published anonymously in 1853 in three volumes, with a dedication to the author of 'Contarini Fleming'. Like Disraeli, Sheppard used real people as characters in her novels. In 'Charles Auchester' Seraphael is supposed to be a portrait of Felix Mendelssohn. Another novel, 'Counterparts, or, The Cross of Love', published in three volumes in 1854, was dedicated to Mrs Disraeli. A second edition appeared in 1866. 
Sheppard published three more novels, some poetry, and two collections of children's stories. She is said to have sometimes used the pseudonym E. Berger, a French rendering of her own surname. Critical response to her work was mixed; 'The Athenaeum' described 'Charles Auchester' as 'displaying... a passion for music rather than a knowledge of it', though acknowledging the 'spirit and eloquence' of her first two novels (Allibone, 'Dict.', 2075). Sheppard died, unmarried, in Brixton, London, on 13 March 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 25342


Sheppard, Sir Fleetwood (1634-1698), courtier and poet, born on 1 January 1634 and baptized on 20 January at Great Rollright, near Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, was the second son of William Sheppard, esquire, of Great Rollright, and Maria (or Mary) Dormer, daughter of Sir Fleetwood Dormer of Grange, Buckinghamshire. His father (the son of William Sheppard and Dorothy Osborne, sister of Sir John Osborne, remembrancer of the exchequer) was in 1644 'slain by one of the king's soldiers', as the parish register has it. He was buried at Great Rollright on 2 October 1644, leaving his wife with seven children. She died in January 1647. 
Fleetwood Sheppard matriculated at Oxford on 19 November 1650, and entered as a commoner at Magdalen Hall, but soon after migrated to Christ Church, where he was nominated to a studentship (fellowship), probably through the interest of the Carnarvon family, to whom he was doubly related: his mother's brother, Peter Dormer, married his father's sister, Ann Sheppard, on 17 May 1637. 
Sheppard graduated BA on 10 May 1654, MA on 11 June 1657, and entered as a student at Gray's Inn on 14 October 1657, but seems not to have stood for the bar. At Christ Church Sheppard delivered a Latin oration in the divinity school on 27 July 1663 at the funeral of William Creed, regius professor of divinity. He was also said to be able to 'read Hebrew without the pricks' (Rymer, 142). In 1664, when all members of the chapter were required to be in full orders, the king instructed Henry Aldrich, dean of Christ Church, that 'Fleetwood Shepherd M.A.... has studied civil law, and is therefore not prepared to take orders, he being a person of much ability' ('CSP dom.', '1664-5', 111). 
'After his majesty's restoration', Wood says, Sheppard 'retir'd to London, hang'd on the court, became a debauchee and atheist, a grand companion with Charles lord Buckhurst, afterwards earl of Dorset, Henry Savile, and others' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.627). Offsetting Wood's dyspeptic account there is a letter of recommendation from Ralph Montagu, ambassador to France, to secretary Sir Henry Bennet written before 25 April 1669: 'He is as witty and ingenious [a] man as ever I met with, and may be made very good use of [in the foreign service]. He is an excellent scholar; he left the University because he was too honest to be a divine. He is very modest, and so not likely to be troublesome to your Lordship. ('Buccleuch MSS', 1.421)' 'The others' at court to whom Buckhurst introduced Sheppard were his sometime mistress, Nell Gwyn, 'Henry Killigrew... gro[o]me of the bed-chamber, Henry Savile sometime one of the gro[o]mes of the duke of York's bed-chamber, Hen. Guy cupbearer to his majesty, Baptist May keeper of the privy purse... Joh. Wilmot earl of Rochester, Joh. [Sheffield] earl of Mulgrave &c. All which were the king's companions at most suppers in the week, an[no] 1676, [16]77.' Sheppard soon 'became one of [the king's] companions in private to make him merry' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.627). 
When Nell Gwyn's first child by the king, Charles Beauclerk, later duke of St Albans, was born in May 1670, Sheppard is said to have been appointed 'steward' of her household, managing her financial affairs and eventually tutoring her son. This claim, however, is not confirmed by other sources. What is certain is that on 16 October 1678 'Nell Gwyn with Fleetw. Shepard were entertained by certain scholars at Cambridge... and had verses presented to her' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 2.420). 
Sheppard's familiarity with Charles II inevitably exposed him to such scurrilities as 'the best of all 'Pimps'' ('Poems on Affairs of State', 5.403) and 'less wit than clown' (Wilson, 94). But his rewards were modest: grants of $200 from the privy purse in 1680 and 1681. 
Buckhurst, who succeeded as sixth earl of Dorset in December 1677, proved to be a more rewarding and more durable friend. In 1675-7 he would go to Great Rollright when Sheppard visited his brother, William Sheppard, who had inherited the estate. In September 1680 they travelled to Paris together to visit Henry Savile, now English ambassador ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 431). Sheppard's imaginative neighbour at Great Rollright, Ralph Sheldon of Weston, assured Anthony Wood that they entertained themselves 'talking blasphemy and atheisme, drinking, and perhaps that which is worse'. Wood also heard that 'Sheppard was either hanged or broke upon the wheele at Parys for some roguery that he had committed' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 2.359, 360). In earlier mishaps Sheppard was 'overturned in a coach att Matt Clifford's funerall and broake his head, and a little before was runn with a sword under the eye endeavouring to part [Henry] Bu[lkele]y [master of the King's household] and [George] Etheridge [the dramatist] squabbling in a Taverne. ('Bath MSS', 2.160)' In the next reign, since James II could not conceal his dislike of him, Sheppard retired to Copt Hall, Dorset's estate in Epping Forest, north of London. After the revolution, however, Sheppard was returned to favour, or 'dwindled to flatter Dutchmen' ('Poems on Affairs of State', 5.534), as one disgruntled tory put it. Promptly in 1689 William appointed Dorset chamberlain of the royal household (and a privy councillor 'ex officio'), a post commanding vast patronage that Dorset voraciously exploited. Sheppard seems to have served Dorset much in the way that Jonathan Swift served Robert Harley, earl of Oxford -- as dispenser of patronage. At least this is what Matthew Prior assumed when he asked Sheppard in 1689 to get him 'some little Place', like the laureateship, for which he had no pretensions whatever ('Literary Works of Matthew Prior', 1.84). Dorset, however, was alleged to have 'Bequeath[ed] the Selling of Places to Shepherd' (BL, MS Harleian 7315, fol. 166'v'). Jonathan Swift said that 'Fleet. Shepherd... would often sell Places that were never in Being, and dispose of others... before they were vacant' (J. Swift, 'A New Way of Selling Places at Court', 1712, 5). One John Bearcroft, serjeant-at-arms to Charles II but now unemployed, petitioned the House of Commons on 2 June 1689 to require ''Fleet Sheppard' [and others]... [to] give an Account of the many Thousand Guineas they have unjustly got from those now put in his Majesty's Service' ('JHC', 10.192). No action was taken because the sale of offices was Dorset's perquisite as lord chamberlain of the household. 
In 1690 Dorset appointed Sheppard a gentleman usher and daily waiter to the king, with lodgings in Whitehall Palace. Sheppard proved as successful in making 'The Queen... very merrey' ('Rutland MSS', 2.137) as he had her uncle, Charles II. Indeed, it was not thought too much to say that he 'made himself and the World very merry' (Oldmixon, 72). On 26 April 1694 he was knighted and succeeded Sir Thomas Duppa as gentleman usher of the black rod, with responsibilities in the royal household, in the House of Lords, and in the Order of the Garter. In June 1696 Sheppard received his last post, keeper of his majesty's Little Park of Windsor. Prior's puzzling remark in a letter to Dorset of 12/22 June 1695, 'Sir Fleetwood... 'went over to the other side'' ('Bath MSS', 3.80), may be explained by the first of Tom Brown's 'Letters from the Dead to the Living', 'A letter of news from Mr. 'Joseph Haines', of merry memory, to his friends at Will's Coffee House in 'Covent Garden'': 'Tony Lee [Anthony Leigh, another stage comedian] turn'd Presbyterian Parson upon his coming to these quarters... my Lord Warwick [a notorious Puritan] and Sir Fleetwood are his constant hearers' (Brown, 12). 
In October 1696, after the House of Commons voted 'a Supply to be granted his Majesty, for carrying on the War against 'France'' ('JHC', 11.568), 'sir Fleetwood invited all the members to the kings cellar by his majesties command, where they drank the kings health' (Luttrell, 4.130). 
Sheppard is said to have been the 'author of many poems' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.628), but since, like Rochester, he published none, only about fifteen have survived. These fifteen, however, spin a slender thread between the late metaphysicals and the early Augustans, between Andrew Marvell and Swift and Pope. 
Sheppard began by translating Marvell's Latin verse into English, and ended by exchanging verse letters with Matthew Prior and subscribing to Dryden's translation of Virgil (1697). He witnessed three of the literary epiphanies of the late seventeenth century. He was there early in 1669 when Buckhurst bought from Thomas Helder's stall in Little Britain a remaindered copy of the first edition (1667) and 'discovered' 'Paradise Lost'. In June 1675 an elaborate chronometer in the Privy Garden at Whitehall Palace was 'broken all to pieces (for they were of glass spheres) by the earl of Rochester, lord Buckhurst, Fleetwood Shephard, etc. coming in from their revells' ('Brief Lives', 2.34). And although he is said to have known 'every tavern from Fish Street Hill to the Cockpit' ('Bath MSS', 3.65), Sheppard's local was Arthur Prior's Rhenish wine house in Channel (later Cannon) Row. When Buckhurst came there looking for him, he found the proprietor's nephew, Matthew Prior, drawer and scullery boy, reading Horace at the bar and sent him back to school at Westminster under Richard Busby. 
Sheppard's poems are satires, both social -- 'A description of a Hampton court life' ('Poems on Affairs of State', 5.56), 'Upon an Old Affected Court Lady' (Buckingham, 182), and political -- 'Songs on the Duke of M[onmouth]' (Wilmot, 231), 'Epitaph on the French King' ('Literary Works of Matthew Prior', 2.848) (Louis XIV was cut for an anal fistula in 1697 and declared 'past recovery' on 18 June 1698), 'The true and genuine explanation of one of King James's explanations' (1692) (Oldmixon, 72). 
Since a satire, unlike a comedy, has no predetermined shape, it may take its shape from a dazzling array of sub-genres. Sheppard adopted many of the same that Swift used later, such as: mock prophecy -- 'A prophecy, found under the foundation of Wallingford Chappel, ingraven in lead, discovered the 2nd of June 1694 and sent to the Lord Mayor by Thomas Povey to proclaime a fast immediately from four a clock to six a clock' (1694) ('Rutland MSS', 2.326); mock petition -- 'The countess of Dorset's petition to the late Queen Mary for chocolate' (Harris, 154); mock epitaph -- 'An Epitaph on the d[uke] of G[rafton]' (1690) ('New Collection', 272); and ballad -- 'The Ballad about the Person that was Kill'd at Newbury with Eating Custard' ('Remarks', 5.105). Alexander Pope did not hesitate to appropriate some of Sheppard's best lines: 'And all in order on her Toylet Lay/Pray'r-Books and Patch Box, Sermon-Notes and Paint' (Buckingham, 83; cf. 'Twickenham Edition', 2.155). Sheppard also wrote 'A true and full account of a late conference between the wonderful speaking head [Thomas Tenison, later archbishop of Canterbury], and Father Godwyn, as 'twas related by the head's own mouth to Dr. Frasier' ('c'.1681) ('Poems on Affairs of State', 1716, 3.121), an anti-clerical satire in the tradition of Marvell's 'Fleckno, an English Priest of Rome'. 
Besides his reputation as a poet, Sheppard was highly regarded as a critic. Rochester was content to have him 'And some few more... / Approve my sense' (Wilmot, 101). Three contemporary critics dedicated books to Sheppard: Thomas Rymer, 'The Tragedies of the Last Age Consider'd and Examin'd by the Practice of the Ancients' (1678 for 1677); John Dennis, 'Poems in Burlesque' (1692); and Charles Gildon, 'Chorus poetarum' (1694). An anonymous writer opposing Thomas Shadwell's candidacy for the laureateship in 1690 bids 'Sheppard, arise!... / Thou judge of wit! Is not poor Shadwell weak?' ('Poems on Affairs of State', 5.111). And Prior, who had reservations about Sheppard's verse: 'too much into Romance and Improbability' (Prior, 'Dialogues of the Dead', 186), had no doubt that Sheppard was 'the Muses Friend' ('Literary Works of Matthew Prior', 1.73): ''All who write would fain please' Sheppard' (Dennis, sig. A4'r'). 
Sheppard's last and best joke may have been his death, unmarried and without children, in 1698. In September 1694 Godolphin was informed that Sheppard was dead. Sir Fleetwood was able to deny this report himself, while 'confessing that he was afflicted with the stone for the last 12 or 14 years' (Redington, 385). In December 1697 he was again reported to be 'dead or dying' ('CSP dom.', '1697', 538), but on 4 January 1698 the report was denied: 'Sir Fletw. Shepherd has deceived us, and still lives' ('CSP dom.', '1698', 12). On 14/24 April Prior wrote to Keppel from Paris, 'The prints say poor Sir Fleetwood is worse, for which I am extremely sorry' ('Bath MSS', 3.208). On 25 August/4 September 1698 Prior learned that his old friend '(who had for some time been in effect dead) marched off yesterday morning' (ibid., 3.261). Sheppard actually died at Copt Hall on 25 August 1698, and was buried in the chancel of Great Rollright chapel on 6 September. But this was apparently yet another false alarm, for seventy years later it was discovered that 'There is now living, at his seat in Essex, Sir Fleetwood Sheppard... in perfect health, though at the age of 120 years' ('Annual Register', September 1768, 175). 
Tom Brown claimed, in a mock epitaph, that Sheppard 'defuncti Venere et Baccho' ('died in the service of Bacchus and Venus'; 'Remarks', 1.319). But Sheppard is no etiolated Rochester. He is very much his own man, famous for not answering letters, for failing to show up, for not keeping promises, and for 'Voluble' lies ('New Collection', 439). But what the surviving evidence reveals is honesty: 'one virtue which I feare I have lost forever', he told Dorset, 'is humility' ('Bath MSS', 2.172). And honesty is the quality that resonates in the Latin epitaph that he wrote for himself ''in my' 'Lord' Dorset''s' 'Common Prayer-Book at' Copt-Hall' ('GM', 600): '
O you who are sure of your salvation, 

pray for the soul 

of the abandoned sinner 

Fleetwood Shepheard, 

still among the living, and sinning wherever he find himself. 

Of meagre faith yet of hope unabashed, 

he wishes and awaits -- without having earned it -- a happy resurrection. 

In the third year of the restoration of our religion and our liberty, 

under the governance 

of William most brave and Mary most fair. 
('Remarks', 1.319, trans. M. Skulsky)' 



@@@@@


doc= 25343


Sheppard, John (1702-1724), thief and prison-breaker, was born on 4 March 1702 in White Row, Spitalfields, London, the son of Thomas Sheppard (1672- 'c'.1706), carpenter, and his wife, Mary. His father, reputedly an honest, industrious artisan, died young, leaving three children. John, known as Jack, together with an elder brother, Thomas ('b'. 1697), received a rudimentary education at Mr Garrett's school, near St Helen's, Bishopsgate. In or soon after 1714 Jack was employed as a servant by William Kneebone, a woollen draper, at the sign of the Angel on the north side of the Strand, opposite St Mary's Church. Kneebone was kind to the boy. He improved him in his writing and accounts and, on 2 April 1717, apprenticed him to Owen Wood, a carpenter in Drury Lane. Sheppard is said to have been a talented apprentice. However, in 1722 one Joseph Hayne, a button-mould maker who lived next door to Sheppard's master, gave up his trade to take the Black Lion alehouse in Lewkenor's Lane, hard by, and he encouraged Sheppard and other apprentices to patronize the house. It was at the Black Lion that Sheppard was introduced to 'a train of vices as before I was altogether a stranger to' ('Narrative', 5-6). There he also met and became enamoured of Elizabeth Lyon (fl. 1722-1726), a prostitute who became his mistress and induced him to steal. 
Sheppard's first known theft was from the Rummer tavern, Charing Cross. Sent there to do a job for his master, Sheppard stole two silver spoons. In August 1723, after further thefts, he absconded from his master and drifted into a life of professional crime. In February 1724 Sheppard was committing burglaries with his brother Thomas and Elizabeth Lyon. This partnership was short-lived. Thomas was apprehended at the beginning of April and informed against his accomplices. Shortly afterwards Jack himself was taken. He was lodged for the night in the parish roundhouse of St Giles-in-the-Fields, but within two hours had escaped by breaking a hole through the roof. It was the first of a series of daring and skilful escapes from captivity. On 25 May he effected a remarkable escape from New prison in Clerkenwell. Sheppard was held, together with Lyon, in the Newgate ward, said to be the strongest apartment in the gaol, but after he had sawed through his fetters and removed an oak muntin and an iron bar from the window the couple descended 25 feet to the yard below by means of a rope fashioned from a sheet, a blanket, and Lyon's gown and petticoat, and then surmounted a 22 foot perimeter wall. In the summer of 1724, with the footpad Joseph Blake (alias Blueskin), Sheppard experimented with highway robbery on the Hampstead Road. He also committed fresh burglaries, including one upon the house of his former benefactor William Kneebone on the night of 12-13 July. By this time, however, his activities had attracted the attention of the famous receiver and thief-taker Jonathan Wild, and his unwillingness to submit his booty to Wild's disposal had antagonized the thief-taker. Wild effected Sheppard's arrest in Rosemary Lane on 23 July and he was committed to Newgate prison in the City of London. He was brought to trial at the Old Bailey in August and, largely upon the strength of evidence procured by Wild, convicted of the Kneebone robbery and sentenced to death. 
On 31 August, four days before the time appointed for his execution, Sheppard sawed through one of the iron spikes surmounting the door of the condemned hold in Newgate and, by squeezing through the gap in the remaining spikes, escaped from the hold into the Lodge, the prison's reception area. From thence, disguised in a nightgown and assisted by Elizabeth Lyon and another woman, he passed through the Lodge and out the main door. This exploit was the talk of London, but Sheppard's period of freedom was brief. Lyon was apprehended the day after the escape and remained in custody until after Sheppard's execution. Sheppard fled the capital, but after a brief sojourn in Wavendon, Buckinghamshire, returned to London and was recaptured on Finchley Common on 10 September by a posse of Newgate turnkeys. Returned to the condemned hold, he immediately began to plan another escape. On 16 September, after a set of tools had been found concealed in the rushes of his chair, he was moved to a formidable fourth-storey apartment known as the Castle, where he was isolated from other prisoners and where visitors were carefully watched. He was also fettered and handcuffed, and his fetters were secured to an iron staple in the floor by a great horse padlock. 
Despite these precautions, Sheppard accomplished his last and most spectacular escape on 15 October. After freeing himself from his handcuffs and breaking the chain of his fetters, he removed an iron bar from the chimney. Then, climbing up the chimney, he broke into the Red Room, directly above the Castle, and from thence, in a hugely impressive display of ingenuity, strength, and determination, worked his way to the upper leads, mastering the locks, bolts, and bars of six strong doors in his progress. He was now on the summit of the gaol, more than 60 feet above Newgate Street, but had to return to his cell for his blanket before letting himself down upon the house of William Bird, a turner, adjoining the prison. After entering Bird's house by a garret window, he stole down the stairs and left the house by the street door. The irons carried off by Sheppard were subsequently recovered at a lodging belonging to Catherine Cook ('fl'. 1717-1724), another of his mistresses, in Cranbourn Alley, Leicester Fields. On the night of 29-30 October Sheppard burgled a pawnbroker's shop in Drury Lane. It was his last robbery. Handsomely attired in some of the plundered finery, he was arrested, very drunk, in a Drury Lane brandy shop on 31 October. Crowds of people now flocked to Newgate to see him, among them Sir James Thornhill, serjeant-painter to the crown, who sketched portraits of him in the Middle Stone Room and the condemned hold. By 7 November the turnkeys were said to have earned more than $200 charging fees to visitors. On 10 November Sheppard was brought before the court of king's bench, Westminster, where a rule of court was ordered for his execution six days hence. He was watched day and night, and on 16 November 1724 was executed at Tyburn before one of the largest crowds Londoners could then remember. He was buried the same day in the churchyard of St Martin-in-the-Fields. His brother Thomas was transported to Maryland in 1725. 
Sheppard's exploits inspired pamphlets, ballads, engravings, and plays, and one clergyman is said to have exhorted his flock to emulate Sheppard in a spiritual sense by mounting the 'chimney of hope' to the 'leads of divine meditation' ('Select Trials', 1.445-6). John Thurmond's 'Harlequin Sheppard' played to 'vast applause' at Drury Lane in December 1724 ('Parker's London News', 7 Dec 1724), and 'The Prison-Breaker', published in 1725 and intended for Lincoln's Inn Fields, was altered by Thomas Walker in 1728 and performed at Bartholomew fair as 'The Quaker's Opera'. There is little reason to suppose that John Gay's Macheath was directly modelled upon Sheppard, but it is highly probable that the popular excitement generated by his escapes, and by the trial of Jonathan Wild in 1725, was a major factor in persuading Gay to develop Jonathan Swift's suggestion of a 'Newgate pastoral' into 'The Beggar's Opera' (1728). Sheppard's fame was revived in 1839 by William Harrison Ainsworth's best-selling romance 'Jack Sheppard', illustrated by some of George Cruikshank's best cuts. Ainsworth's triumph inspired many imitative romances and innumerable stage plays and aroused 'respectable' fears that unwary youths might be led into crime by a desire to imitate Sheppard. 'Public morality and public decency', wrote John Forster, 'have rarely been more endangered than by the trumpeted exploits of Jack Sheppard' ('Examiner', 3 Nov 1839). Moved by such considerations, successive lord chamberlains refused to license plays entitled 'Jack Sheppard' for nearly forty years after 1840, but the ban was not strictly enforced outside London, and even there theatre managers frequently circumvented it by producing Sheppard plays under neutral titles like 'The Idle Apprentice' and 'Old London'. In 1886 the actress Nellie Farren enjoyed great success playing Jack in William Yardley and Henry Pottinger Stephens's burlesque, 'Little Jack Sheppard', staged at London's Gaiety Theatre, but thereafter Sheppard's popular fame, and hence the emotive power of his name, declined. During the twentieth century, nevertheless, his career continued to inspire writers and dramatists. Paramount's lavish but commercially unsuccessful 'Where's Jack?' (1969), directed by James Clavell and starring Tommy Steele as Jack and Sir Stanley Baker as Jonathan Wild, was the last of three cinematic versions of the story. 
The notice for Sheppard's arrest after his escape from the Castle described him as 'about 22 years old, about five foot four inches high, very slender, of a pale complexion, has an impediment or hesitation in his speech' ('Daily Journal', 20 Oct 1724). Although Sheppard's talents as a prison-breaker were undoubtedly extraordinary his personal character has occasioned much dispute. The available evidence suggests that he was neither Ainsworth's dashing hero nor John Langbein's 'nasty thug' ('TLS', 11 Oct 1991) but a mixture of worthy as well as unworthy qualities. His robberies were characterized by adroitness and skill rather than violence, and his courage, his loyalty to companions, and his cheery if impudent disposition lend some colour to popular portrayals of him as a likeable rogue. It cannot be said of him, on the other hand, that his crimes were prompted by necessity, and he became a persistent and -- as the Kneebone robbery demonstrated -- undiscriminating thief. 


@@@@@


doc= 25344


Sheppard, John (1785-1879), religious writer, born on 15 October 1785 at Frome, Somerset (where his family had lived since the Restoration), was the son of John Sheppard and his wife, Mary Kelson, daughter of John Banger of Piddletown, Dorset. He left school in 1800 to enter the wool trade, in which most of his relatives worked. In 1806, after his father's death, he and his mother joined the Baptists, a body to which many of his family belonged. With John Foster (1770-1843), Baptist minister in Frome from 1804, Sheppard developed a lasting friendship. The death of his uncle, Walter Sheppard, who made him his heir, enabled him to give up his business. Deciding to study medicine, he matriculated at Edinburgh University in late 1812, but was soon diverted to the study of philosophy and Hebrew. During two years' residence at Edinburgh he formed friendships with Thomas Chalmers and with John Pinkerton, the antiquary. In 1816 and 1817 he made tours through France, Italy, Switzerland, and Germany, and studied for some months at the University of Gottingen. On his return he published 'Letters on a Tour of France' (1817). 
In 1823 Sheppard published his most successful work, 'Thoughts Preparative or Persuasive to Private Devotion', which went through five editions in as many years. From that period until his death he devoted himself to writing religious works, lay preaching, and foreign travel. His last work was 'The Christian Harp' (1858). He died at Frome on 30 April 1879, and was buried in the dissenters' cemetery. He was twice married, and his second wife, Susan Anne Dawe, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25345


Shepherd, Nicholas (1533-1587), college head, matriculated as a sizar from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1549, and was admitted a scholar there on the foundation of Sir Marmaduke Constable on 4 July, his native county being given as Westmorland. He was admitted at the command of the royal visitors. He graduated BA in 1553 and was elected a fellow on the foundation of William Fell on 25 March, but was ejected in 1554. Shepherd graduated MA in 1559, and was reinstated as a fellow in 1559-60. On 15 January 1561 he was elected a senior fellow. He served as junior bursar of the college in 1561-2, and on 4 July 1562 was elected a fellow of Trinity College. At Trinity Shepherd held office as junior dean (1562-3), senior bursar (1562-4), and vice-master (1564-9). He was university preacher in 1561 and 1566, and graduated BTh in 1568. 
On 17 December 1569 Shepherd was elected master of St John's, 'with the great consent of the company' (Scott 1910, 299) according to Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, who wrote to William Cecil recommending Shepherd to his patronage. Grindal expressed the hope that he would restore the college to the 'antient fame it had in your days and mine'. This hope was to some extent vindicated by the election as fellows of the Hebraist Hugh Broughton, the Greek scholar Andrew Downes, Everard Digby, and others, for whose advancement Thomas Baker unequivocally gives Shepherd credit. Broughton himself states that Shepherd personally enforced his election in 1570, and tried to deter him from migrating to Christ's by persuading the seniors to join him in doubling the value of Broughton's fellowship out of their own allowances. According to Broughton, Shepherd, having failed, 'was sick for grief, as many did report' ('Works', 360-61). Perhaps in complement to Broughton's work, a great Syriac 'Testament' was bought by agreement of the master and seniors in 1570. 
During September 1573 when the bishop of Ely carried out a visitation of St John's, some fellows indicted Shepherd on charges of peculation, insufficient residence, and opposition to the established church by fostering a puritan faction within the college. Shepherd responded to the charges, appealing to his patron Cecil, but in July the following year he vacated the mastership. His conduct, however well meaning, had been at times high-handed, as in the case of Broughton. He had been a prebendary of Peterborough since 1560 and of Lincoln since 1572, and retained these posts and the Lincolnshire rectory of Hougham until his death there between 10 and 16 July 1587, when he was buried at Hougham. His will mentions a wife, Rachel, as well as his mother, now named Anne Todd. 


@@@@@


doc= 25346


Sheppard, Robert (fl. 1712-1740), engraver, remains a relatively obscure figure in the history of the eighteenth-century print world. It is said that he studied engraving under David Loggan (1634-1692), but if this is the case he must have worked with that engraver in his waning years, which were plagued by poverty and increasing blindness. In 1712 Sheppard's name appears on the list of members of the Great Queen Street Academy, founded by Sir Godfrey Kneller in the preceding year. Mixing there with more renowned engravers such as George Vertue, Gerard Vandergucht, and Nicolas Dorigny, he had the opportunity to hone his drawing skills through the study of antique casts and life models. Like those engravers, Sheppard (sometimes known as Shepherd) was also heavily involved in reproducing portraits of sovereigns and statesmen for the Knapton Brothers' enormously successful folio publication of Paul de Thoyras-Rapin's 'History of England' (1732-7). With their characteristic sculptural ornamentation surrounding competently engraved portraits, these relatively standardized line engravings are usually signed 'R. Sheppard Sculpt'. A few other portraits by Sheppard are known, including one of Edward Kidder, which formed the frontispiece to his 'Receipts' of 1740. He also engraved three out of a set of six plates after Gerard Audran's 'Battles of Alexander'; although these have been criticized as poor by Samuel Redgrave, it should be noted that they were worked up from some very cheap, and late, impressions and cannot therefore provide a true measure of Sheppard's capacity as an engraver. 


@@@@@


doc= 25347


Sheppard, Samuel (c.1624-1655?), writer, was the son of Harman Sheppard, physician, who died on 12 July 1639, aged ninety, and of Petronella (Parnell) Sheppard, who died on 10 September 1650. His parents married at Christ Church, London, on 10 April 1623, and all historical records relating to Samuel Sheppard situate him in London and its environs. No record of his education survives, though he appears to have been a presbyterian minister; John Hackluyt, a rival writer, called Sheppard a 'blasphemous Cleargy-spot' ('Metropolitan Nuncio', 3, 6-13 June 1649, C.i.v). Sheppard's main activity, however, was as a writer, and from 1646 to 1654 he wrote copiously, in news weeklies, prose reports, essays, poetry, and drama, about the events of the civil war. 
In 'God and Mammon' (1646) and 'The Yeare of Jubile' (1646), Sheppard supports Fairfax, Cromwell, and the parliamentarian reforms, but he also takes pains to represent King Charles as a noble man unfortunately surrounded by weak and corrupt counsellors, 'wicked 'Incendiaries'... resident about the KING' ('God and Mammon', title-page). In 'The Famers Fam'd' (1646) and 'The False Alarum' (1646) Sheppard attacks John Lilburne, and in 'The Times Displayed in Six Sestyads' (1646), Sheppard's first large poetic work, he satirizes a wide variety of religious denominations and appends an account of the best and worst in English poetry up to the death of Francis Quarles. 
Although Sheppard had hitherto supported parliamentarian reforms from a presbyterian standpoint, he was greatly alarmed at the imprisonment of the king in 1646, and his subsequent writings aimed to support Charles and preserve his life. 'The Committee-Man Curried', a play in two parts (1647), depicts parliamentarians as corrupt and hypocritical while allowing a modicum of dignity and moral worth to the royalist character, Loyalty. From 1647 to 1649 Sheppard was active in the writing and editing of underground royalist mercuries and news weeklies, such as 'Mercurius Melancholicus', 'Mercurius Pragmaticus', 'Mercurius Elencticus', 'Mercurius Aulicus', 'Mercurius Dogmaticus', the 'Parliament Kite', and the 'Royall Diurnall'. From late 1647-8 the newsbooks become openly hostile towards Fairfax and Cromwell, while Charles is idealized. In the context of bitter rivalry between news weeklies, persecution by parliamentary authorities, and the frequent imprisonment of editors and writers, Sheppard's activities cannot be determined precisely. The poet John Cleveland wrote 'Mercurius Pragmaticus', and Sheppard appears to have been connected with this journal at the outset ('Metropolitan Nuncio', 3, 6-13 June 1649, C.i.v). In January 1648, probably while writing for 'Mercurius Dogmaticus', Sheppard was sought, and possibly imprisoned, by parliamentary authorities ('Mercurius Melancholicus', 21, 15-22 Jan 1648, 120; 'Mercurius Anti-Mercurius', 1, 12-19 Sept 1648, 2-3). The revival of 'Mercurius Aulicus' from early February to mid May 1648 has been attributed to Sheppard, chiefly because these editions bear his personal motto, 'Quis me impune lacessit'. In the spring of 1648 Sheppard became the chief writer of 'Mercurius Elencticus' when its editor, George Wharton, was imprisoned ('Mercurius Anti-Mercurius', 1, 12-19 Sept 1648, 1-2). In June 1648 Sheppard was imprisoned in Petre House, Aldersgate Street ('Mercurius Melancholicus', 44, 19-26 June 1648, 265), and by the end of July he was at liberty and contributing to the 'Royall Diurnall' and possibly the 'Parliament Kite' as well as a counterfeit version of 'Mercurius Melancholicus' ('Mercurius Melancholicus', 51, 7-14 Aug 1648, title-page verso; the 'Royall Diurnall', 4, 14-22 Aug 1648, D.i.v). 
On 16 April 1649 a warrant was issued for the arrest of Sheppard and William Wright, identified as writer and printer respectively of 'Mercurius Elencticus' ('CSP dom.', '1649-50', 529). Sheppard remained in prison until at least May 1650 ('CSP dom.', '1650', 143), by which time Charles had been executed and Sheppard's cause lost; John Thurloe, secretary of state, appears to have supported Sheppard's release (Sheppard, 'The Weepers', 1652, 11). During this longest period of imprisonment, spent at Newgate and possibly also at Lollards' Tower, Lambeth, and again at Petre House, Sheppard completed his most interesting and ambitious work, 'The Faerie King' (Sheppard, 'Epigrams', 1651, 6.16; 'Postscript', c.1654, to 'Faerie King'). Unlike the preceding news weeklies, 'The Faerie King', existing in a single holograph MS (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. Poet. 28) and unpublished until 1984, offers a richly ambivalent portrait of Charles and the nature of monarchy. The Spenserian title belies the originality and thoughtfulness of this verse epic. 
After his release in 1650 Sheppard continued to publish in a variety of genres and managed to avoid further trouble with parliamentarian authorities: a prose romance, 'Amandus and Sophronia' (1650); 'The Joviall Crew' (1651), a play satirizing the ranters; 'Epigrams Theological, Philosophical, and Romantick' (1651), which includes an epigram to Cromwell; 'The Socratick Session' and 'A Mausolean Monument', both printed with 'Epigrams' and the latter a tribute to his late parents, dedicated to his 'Kinsman' Christopher Clapham of Beamsley, Yorkshire, and also mentioning his wife, Mary; 'Discoveries' (1652); the commendatory poem in Thomas Manley's 'Veni; vidi; vici' (1652), a panegyric to Cromwell; possibly 'Mercurius Mastix' (1652), a diatribe against news weeklies; 'The Weepers' (1652), a darkly bitter work matching the mood of 'Mercurius Mastix' and 'The Faerie King' and hinting at Sheppard's continued respect for the king; 'Merlinus Anonymous' (1653), a mock almanac, and probably 'Good-Ale Monopolized' (1654), a satire on Robert Tichborne, both works published under the anagrammatic pseudonym Raphael Desmus. The last reference to Sheppard (which suggests he was still alive at the time of writing) is in William Winstanley's 'The Muses Cabinet' (1655, 22), and he presumably died later in this year. 


@@@@@


doc= 25348


Sheppard, William (fl. 1641-1660), portrait painter, makes his first appearance in historical records in February 1641, when 'Mr. Sheppard a Picture maker by Cree church [St Katharine Cree]' paid his admittance fee to the London Company of Painter-Stainers (Guildhall Library, MS 5667/1, fol. 157). It is also during this decade that Sheppard acquired his only recorded apprentice, Francis Barlow, who on arrival from Lincolnshire was 'put prentice to one Shepherd, a Face-Painter, with whom he lived but a few years because his Fancy did not lie that way' (Vertue, 2.135). 
During the Commonwealth years Sheppard may have allied himself with the exiled royalists; he is referred to in the notebooks of Richard Symonds, the royalist diarist and antiquary, during the latter's stay in Rome from 1649 to 1651. Sheppard, then in Rome, informed Symonds of the price paid in London for 'azzuro' (ultramarine). In Venice in 1650 Sheppard painted the portrait of the royalist Thomas Killigrew, who had been appointed Charles II's resident to the Venetian republic. This image, which is both a portrait of Killigrew and a mourning picture for Charles I, is the only painting by Sheppard known to survive; there are various versions, of which the principal belongs to the National Portrait Gallery, London. It was engraved by William Faithorne. 
In 1651 'William Sheppard, an English limner' sailed from Italy to Constantinople. He was shipwrecked near Samos and was taken to Rhodes, where he was 'kept in restraint', and his wife in London had to solicit the Levant Company to obtain his release ('CSP dom.', 50). Sheppard was back in London by the Restoration. Despite the lack of evidence, it seems that he enjoyed a good practice as in 1658 William Sanderson included him in his list of 'English modern masters': 'In the 'Life', 'Walker', 'Zowst', 'Wright', 'Lillie', 'Hales', 'Shepheard', 'de Grange', rare Artizans' (Sanderson, 20). The only work that may be attributed to William Sheppard apart from the portrait of Killigrew is a portrait of Sir Henry Terne (after 1660). It is only known from the engraving by William Faithorne. 
George Vertue's information on Sheppard was brief: 'Mr. Shephard face painter. who livd in K. Charles 2d time. Mr. Russel. when a boy knew him. he livd in London at that time. near the Royal exchange. was a pleasant Companion -- afterwards retird into Yorkshire where he died. (Vertue, 4.64)' Horace Walpole transcribed Vertue's account in his 'Anecdotes' but had nothing to add to it. 


@@@@@


doc= 25349


Sheppard, William (bap. 1595, d. 1674), barrister and legal writer, was baptized on 14 December 1595 at St Andrew's Church, Whitminster, near Frampton-on-Severn, Gloucestershire, the eldest of five children born to Philip Sheppard (died 1623) and Elizabeth Tyrell. Two more sons and two daughters were born between 1597 and 1605 (Sarah, Rebecca, John, and Samuel), and in 1608 the family moved to Horsley in the Cotswold region south of Stroud. 
Horsley remained Sheppard's principal home until 1637. His first marriage, about 1617, to Mary of Wingfield, Wiltshire, brought them two children, John in 1618 and Mary in 1620; his wife apparently died soon after her daughter's birth. (John attended Wadham College, Oxford, and became a minister. Mary married John Clifford of Frampton.) In 1620 Sheppard was admitted to the Middle Temple where he was called to the bar in 1629. He retained the Temple lodgings he shared with William Hussey until 1631 when he returned to Horsley to establish a country law practice. In 1621 Sheppard married his second wife, Anne, daughter of George Worth of Buckington Manor, Wiltshire. Their children Elizabeth ('b'. 1623), Sarah ('b'. 1624), Samuel ('b'. 1627), and Anne ('b'. 1628) were baptized in Horsley. Another son, William, was born during that decade, possibly to his third wife, the Widow Fisher. In August 1637 when he married his fourth wife, Alice Coney, Sheppard moved to Hempsted, a parish bordering Gloucester, where his daughter Rebecca was born in 1649. Apart from three years spent in Cromwell's service in London, Hempsted remained his home for the rest of his long life. 
In his native county and neighbouring areas Sheppard practised as a conveyancer and served as steward on several manors, presiding over their courts. He was an attorney of Gloucester's local court, and attended the great sessions of Wales, the Oxford and western circuit assizes, and quarter sessions; the legal texts he published are filled with citations to cases heard in those courts. His undoubted expertise in conveyancing is apparent in 'The Touchstone of Common Assurances' (1648, not 1641 as often given; English edns to 1826, Irish edn 1785, United States edns to 1840-41), a collection of twenty-three essays. Other early works reflecting his local country practice were several manuals for local law enforcement, 'The Offices and Duties of Constables' (1641, rev. 1652, 1657), 'The Court-Keepers Guide' (1649, 1650, 1654, 1656, 1662, posthumous edns in 1767 and 1791) for stewards of manor courts, and 'The Whole Office of the Country Justice of the Peace' (1650, 1661, 1662). 'An Exact Collection of Choice Declarations' (1653) by 'W. S., one of the clerks of the upper bench office' (title-page) was incorrectly attributed to Sheppard by the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. It was written by William Small, a clerk of the king's bench. Sheppard's initial effort to compile a legal encyclopaedia, the two-part 'The Faithfull Councellor, or, The Marrow of the Law in English' (1651 and 1654), was the base for later works. In each of these books Sheppard presented in English an updated account of the law with clear and concise definitions and citations to recent cases. His goal from his first to his last publication was to clarify current law in the interest of accessibility to justice. 
Sheppard's commitment to legal reform was mirrored by a passion for religious reform, and his call by Cromwell owes as much to his religious commitment as to his proven legal skills. His first two religious publications (both 1649) were a catechism dedicated to the people of Gloucester and an essay on salvation. His argument of 1652 advocating lay preaching identified Sheppard as a follower of John Owen and the Independents and was undoubtedly critical in bringing him to Cromwell's attention. 
Sheppard was summoned to London in the spring of 1654 to advise Cromwell on legal matters and to create a law reform programme. There are strong inferential grounds that Sheppard drafted the chancery ordinance, a reform document issued in August 1654, and internal evidence -- a determination to avoid delays, reduce costs, and eliminate corruption through regulating procedure -- reflects Sheppard's approach to reform. Despite opposition, Cromwell implemented the ordinance in 1655 and it remained in effect until 1658. 
Sheppard's outstanding achievement and the centrepiece of his contribution to the protectorate was 'England's Balme' (1656, but 1657 on the title page). Dedicated to Cromwell 'and your council, by whose care it hath been brought forth', it was the fullest design for the reform of English law published in the seventeenth century. In it Sheppard gathered 'other men's grievances', including reforms advocated by earlier writers, and wove them into an original scheme, producing a plan notable for the comprehensiveness of its scope. A number of his recommendations were drafted as bills presented to the parliament of 1656, and the guiding principles and many particular reforms were adopted in the nineteenth century. A central tenet was the legal unification of England, with the fusion of law and equity in an integrated appellate judicial system, uniformity of process, abolition of special pleading and of benefit of clergy, reduction of capital crimes and abolition of imprisonment for debt, registration of title, simplified conveyancing, county courts for small claims, defendants in felony cases allowed counsel and sworn witnesses, and a number of social reforms. One jarring note in this package of essentially moderate reforms is a provision that 'godless and wicked men... dangerous in their principles... or notoriously wicked or scandalous... so long as they continue so, be incapable of any office in the commonwealth' (W. Sheppard, 'England's Balme', 1656, 41-2). Predicated on Sheppard's belief that only godly men 'who declare the power of godliness in their lives' and a second rank of 'all sober and civil men' were fit to rule, his aim was to establish a new political order based upon a reformed law made more rational, simpler, and more humane (ibid.). Looking to the example of the Massachusetts Bay colony settlement for many of his ideas, he hoped to bring the laws and the governance of England into closer accord with the laws of God. 
Sheppard prepared nine books to support the protector's agenda for reform during the three years he served as Cromwell's legal adviser (June 1654 - August 1657). To ensure support for a preaching ministry, 'The Parson's Guide' providing guidance on tithe collection was issued three times in 1654. A handbook of warrants used by justices of the peace was published the same year (1654, updated edns 1660, 1672). In 1655 'A View of All the Laws... Concerning the Service of God or Religion' set out the legal framework of the religious settlement that had been promulgated by ordinance in 1654. Published to serve immediate goals of the administration, these works were short-lived. In contrast, 'The President [Precedent] of Presidents' (1655, edns to 1870) was issued in at least ten editions. A companion volume to his 'Touchstone' (1648), it introduced standard forms to register land and was endorsed by the government newspaper as a conveyancing precedent 'of singular use and profit to all men' ('Publick Intelligencer', 10 Feb 1656, 280). In April 1656 his 'A Survey of County Judicatures' called for the reinvigoration of ancient courts to hear suits of small value, and the same month the fourth edition of his 'Court-Keepers Guide', also a review of local jurisdictions, was recommended in the government newspaper, the 'Publick Intelligencer' (21 April 1656, 509). Official approval of Sheppard's work was signalled by renewing his annual salary of $300 in January 1656, by the February appointment of a committee to consider his law reform proposals, and by the introduction of bills for both land registration and country courts to the second protectorate parliament in September. In May 1656 Sheppard's second legal encyclopaedia, 'An Epitome of All the Common and Statute Laws of the Nation now in Force' (1656), was printed 'by his highness's special command' (title page). His last assignment under the protectorate provided material for his 1659 book, 'Of Corporations, Fraternities, and Guilds', the first book in English on the law of corporations which included the texts of five Cromwellian charters. In June 1656 the council of state assigned Sheppard to head a commission that prepared or revised at least fourteen corporation charters for boroughs throughout England and Wales. 
The zenith of Sheppard's public career came in October 1656 when the government created him a serjeant-at-law just weeks after 'England's Balme' was published. He continued working on borough charters until August 1657 when his employment under the protectorate government ended. Sheppard was paid some back salary owed him and he returned to his family and his country practice. 
Back in Hempsted and faced with financial hardship Sheppard petitioned Cromwell in November 1657 for 'some office or place to continue some part of [my] salary'. Finding that his association with the protectorate government was 'distasteful to many' and he had 'lost his law practice utterly in his country', the petition noted that he had five children of his own and the widow and three children of his son John, a minister, in his household, 'all as yet unprovided for' (TNA: PRO, SP 18/157/131, fol. 150). The council authorized an annual pension of $100, but no record of payments has been discovered. His final religious work, 'Of the Foure Last and Greatest Things: Death, Judgement, Heaven and Hell', was published in April 1658 in collaboration with Thomas Barlow, provost of Oxford's Queen's College. Sheppard, who returned to writing legal texts, heard no more from Westminster until September 1659, when he was called back into the political arena by the restored Rump Parliament and appointed to the Welsh bench and sworn as chief justice of the north Wales circuit. That autumn two works written during his service to Cromwell were published, 'A New Survey of the Justice of Peace' (1659) and the more important 'Of Corporations' (1659). 
At the time of the Restoration, Sheppard was sixty-five years old, and in the remaining years of his life he published another seven books, principally dealing with local law enforcement and property law, topics that had long occupied his attention, but with two innovative studies, 'Action upon the Case for Slander' (1662) and 'Actions upon the Case for Deeds' (1663), both reprinted in the 1670s without the lengthy case illustrations. An entirely new handbook for magistrates, 'A Sure Guide to his Majesties Justices of the Peace' (1662), bravely criticized the intolerance of the Restoration religious settlement, introducing legal arguments to soften persecution. A short manual, 'Of the Office of the Clerk of the Market' (1665), illustrates Sheppard's indefatigable drive to define yet another local office. 'The Practical Counsellor in the Law' (1671) and 'The Law of Common Assurances' (1669) together constituted an enlargement on the 'Touchstone', but the added material did not improve upon the original. His final work, 'A Grand Abridgment of the Common and Statute Law of England' (published posthumously in 1675), was a partly rewritten expansion of his two earlier encyclopaedias, 'Faithfull Councellor', 1 and 2 (1651, 1653) and 'The Epitome' (1656). 
Sheppard died on 26 March 1674 at Hempsted, Gloucestershire, and was buried in the nave of St Swithin's Church, Hempsted, four days later. His widow, Alice, died on 29 July 1693 and was buried with her husband. 
Over a thirty-three-year writing career Sheppard produced forty-nine editions of his twenty-three books on the law and there is a fundamental consistency in the considerable contributions to legal literature of this formidably industrious and productive author. He broke new ground in the literature of actions on the case, the law of corporations, and standardized precedents for land records. His manuals for local officials updated and often improved on earlier efforts and are valuable for what they reveal about the way the law actually functioned in his generation. His three encyclopaedic compilations, which combined statutes, case law, and legal definitions, were the first published in English. They were, by the author's admission, incomplete, yet they demonstrate Sheppard's confidence that, with the right tools, the law could be made accessible and the legal system more efficient. The nine books he prepared for the protectorate typify the pragmatic reforms of Cromwell's administration and add an authoritative dimension to the evidence supporting Cromwell's reputation as an advocate of law reform. Sheppard's master-work of law reform proposals, 'England's Balme', the most comprehensive law reform document of this fruitful period, clearly places Sheppard in the historical continuum with Finch and other earlier reformers and the moderate lawyers who supported Cromwell. The failure of his programme can be partly explained by opposition from powerful forces within the legal establishment as well as challenges in the political realm, and the book was largely forgotten or ignored for more than a century. It is to Sheppard's credit that he never lost his confidence that the law could be made more rational and humane, and his tenacity in pursuing this goal is remarkable. 
Sheppard's two most influential books endured for two centuries and served the profession well. In the 'Touchstone' (1648, edns to 1840-41) and 'The President' (1655, edns to 1870), he wrote clearly on the subject he knew best. The political discredit arising from his close association with Cromwell may have led to the allegation in 1760 that Sheppard plagiarized the 'Touchstone''s text from a manuscript found in John Doddridge's library. This charge was written by J. Booth of Lincoln's Inn on the title page of his copy, the story admittedly emanating from third-hand hearsay. Edward Hilliard, editor of the 1780 edition of the 'Touchstone', published the accusation as did later editors. Years later R. W. Bridgman in 'A Short View of Legal Bibliography' (1807) and John Clarke in 'Bibliotheca legum' (1810) disputed the allegation, noting that much of the text was grounded in material not available until the year of Doddridge's death (1628). Sheppard most certainly wrote the book himself, but the slur on his reputation persisted and was repeated by John Hutchinson in 'A Catalogue of Notable Middle Templars' (1902), pages 223-4; W. R. Williams in 'A History of the Great Sessions in Wales' (1899), page 60; P. H. Winfield in 'The Chief Sources of English Legal History' (1925), pages 240-41; W. L. Holdsworth in 'A History of English Law' (1923-37), volume 5, page 83, and by others. The evidence distinctly supports Sheppard's authorship and the 'Touchstone' remained the best introduction to conveyancing in that 200-year period. 


@@@@@


doc= 25350


Sheppey, John (c.1300-1360), bishop of Rochester, presumably took his name from the Isle of Sheppey off the northern coast of Kent. Nothing is known of his family, except that he was survived by a sister, Alice, and her son, Peter, and may have been related to another John Sheppey, sub-sacrist at Rochester Priory. He was educated as a Benedictine at Rochester under the patronage of Bishop Hamo Hethe (died 1352), and ordained deacon on 17 June 1318. He studied at Oxford and Hethe gave him permission to incept in theology in June 1332. On 12 August 1333 he was elected prior of Rochester. He was an able financial administrator, and enforced monastic observances said to have lapsed through negligence. Relations with Hethe were cordial, apart from a squabble during a visitation when Sheppey sided with a monk, John Hwytefelde, who, in a sermon, challenged Hethe's authority over the monks who had elected him. Sheppey's public duties drew him to the attention of government. In 1345 he was sent on a diplomatic mission to Castile to arrange Princess Joan's marriage, and he took this opportunity to visit the papal court at Avignon. He was a member of the king's council from 1345, and was one of the diplomats sent to Calais in 1349 to arrange a truce. 
Following Hethe's resignation Sheppey was provided to the see of Rochester by papal letter dated 22 November 1352, and was consecrated in St Mary Overie, Southwark, by William Edington, bishop of Winchester (died 1366), on 10 March 1353. His episcopal register survives only fragmentarily, but, as he himself declared in a sermon, he was vigorous in prosecuting the unchaste in his diocese. Secular duties multiplied, and from 28 November 1356 until his death he acted as treasurer of England. He died on 19 October 1360 at his manor of La Place, Lambeth, and was buried in Rochester Cathedral at the altar of St John the Baptist, where he had founded a chantry. His elaborately painted effigy still survives in the presbytery, where it was discovered walled up in 1825. His will was drawn up less than a month before his death; his legatees included his sister and nephew, the prior and convent of Rochester, William Whittlesey (died 1374), who succeeded him as bishop, colleagues in the royal service, and his friend Edington, to whom he left a memorial ring. 
Sheppey is best known as a preacher. His sermons -- among the few fourteenth-century episcopal sermons extant -- survive in his autograph collection in Oxford, New College, MS 92. The majority are dated between 1336 and 1354, and were preached principally in Rochester, though they include two preached at Paul's Cross, London; most of them are occasional sermons. Although they are recorded in Latin, Sheppey's own testimony, and the presence of many vernacular phrases, show that most were intended for English delivery. He also collected other sermons and theological material useful for preaching, which survive in Oxford, Merton College, MS 248, including what may be his own abridgement of the 'Fabulae' of Odo of Cheriton (died 1247). Three more books owned by him survive, principally of theology, but with some works of Aristotle. 


@@@@@


doc= 25351


Shepreve, John (1509?-1542), classical scholar, was born in Sugworth, Berkshire; the Roman Catholic priest William Shepreve was his nephew. Having gained a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, he was appointed a probationer fellow there in 1528. He graduated BA on 3 December 1529, and at an early age was held 'in great esteem for his sufficiencies in the Greek and Hebrew tongues' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.81). Shepreve was made a full fellow in 1530, and incorporated MA three years later. The same year also saw his appointment as a supervisor of wine and, more significantly, as a college lecturer in Greek. In 1538 he was made a professor of Hebrew, a position he held concurrently with his college lectureship. 
Shepreve was a gifted linguist and poet, much valued by his contemporaries. As a lecturer he sought to combine his devotion to the biblical languages with his conservative beliefs. While the evangelical party at his college claimed that in 1538 Shepreve had allegedly held the view that 'the studiying off the scriptures was subversion of goode order' (Milne, 30-31), in April 1542 he nevertheless petitioned the university authorities for a permission to read on the Hebrew text of 'Genesis'. There can be no doubt that Shepreve abided by the decree that he should 'lecture in godly and catholic fashion' (Oxford University Archives, register I, fol. 81). 
As a poet Shepreve was widely acclaimed; Wood claimed that it was 'an ordinary matter with him to compose 100 very good verses every day in his vacant hours' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 1.135). His literary output not only was extraordinarily divergent but also offers a remarkable insight into his beliefs. In his authoritative biography in Latin hexameters of a former president of his college, John Claymond, he described pre-Reformation religious practice with so much genuine affection that a later Edwardian copyist added marginal notes warning the reader 'not to give credence' ('ne crede, lector') to some of the 'Papist' practices mentioned (Corpus Christi College, Oxford, MS 257, fol. 16'v', fol. 244'r'). While Shepreve doubtlessly remained faithful to his conservative beliefs, his Hebrew hymn in praise of Henry VIII suggests that he probably subscribed to the royal supremacy. 
Even Shepreve's literary publications are suffused by conservative beliefs. In a versified paraphrase of Ovid's 'Phaedra', he reminisced about traditional doctrines of justification and concluded that 'as piety is an ancient virtue, we should believe that former generations did good works' ('si vetus est pietas, tanto magis esse tenedam arbitrior antiquis multa fieri bona'; Corpus Christi College, Oxford, MS 266, fol. 29'v'). A few of his manuscript works were published posthumously by his admirers. His three mnemonic aids to the 'New Testament', composed for his students in Latin verse, were repeatedly incorporated in contemporary commentaries. Shepreve also built up a reputation as an accomplished translator. While his translations of Euripides' 'Hecuba' into Latin, and Seneca's 'Hercules furens' into English are no longer extant, his Latin translation of Basil the Great's commentary on 'Isaiah' remains in manuscript. He died in Amersham, Buckinghamshire, in July 1542. 


@@@@@


doc= 25352


Shepreve, William (c.1540-1598), Roman Catholic priest and scholar, nephew of John Shepreve, was born near Abingdon, Berkshire, about 1540. On 16 February 1555 he was elected to a scholarship at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, 'aged fourteen or thereabouts' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.668). He was made a probationer of his college in November 1558 and graduated BA on 15 February 1560, 'which was the highest degree he took in this university' (ibid.). 
A devoted Catholic, Shepreve left Oxford for the Low Countries. In 1574 he arrived at the English College in Douai and was ordained to the priesthood later that year. Soon after his arrival at Douai, Shepreve continued his studies and began to read for a BTh at the Catholic university there. He was examined on 20 November 1575 and admitted BTh on 23 December. On 5 May 1576 he was appointed principal of the College of Anchin, also in the diocese of Arras. He is recorded as one of the doctors who were admitted DTh at Douai. 
Shepreve was sent to Rome on 9 November, intending to live in Italy and to help establish an English college there; he accompanied doctors Stapleton, White, and Martin. In Rome he was 'exhibited to' (maintained by) Gabriele Paleotti, cardinal archbishop of Bologna, whom he served as a chaplain. Two letters from Bologna to the rector of the English College, one by Paleotti and another by Shepreve, survive. A capable writer and biblical interpreter Shepreve devoted his skills to providing a thorough companion to the Marian office. His 'Connexio literalis psalmorum in officio beatae Mariae virginis' (Rome, 1596) was the only work to be published. In manuscript, Shepreve left two minor glosses on the 'Pauline epistles' and an exposition of the Marian office as well as an anthology of popular scriptural passages. 
Shepreve died at St Severian's, Rome, in 1598, 'to the great reluctance of those who knew him' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.668). 


@@@@@


doc= 25353


Shepstone, Sir Theophilus (1817-1893), politician in Natal, was born on 8 January 1817 at Westbury-on-Trym, on the outskirts of Bristol, Gloucestershire, the son of (John) William Shepstone (1796-1873), stonemason and Methodist missionary, and his wife, Elizabeth Brooks (1793-1833). In 1820 the Shepstone family joined one of the parties of English settlers recruited to establish farming settlements near the eastern frontier of Cape Colony in South Africa. For three years after landing with his family at Algoa Bay on 1 May 1820, William Shepstone was engaged in building work at Bathurst and Grahamstown. His abilities as a lay preacher attracted the attention of Methodist missionary superintendent William Shaw who was looking for men to establish stations beyond the Cape frontier. In 1823 William became assistant missionary at Wesleyville; from there he moved on to various missionary postings among the Xhosa. Theophilus was mainly educated at home, where he acquired from his African playmates a thorough colloquial knowledge of the Xhosa language, as well as his African name, Somtseu. As early as the age of ten he was already assisting missionary William Shrewsbury as an interpreter. By the age of fifteen he was collaborating with William Boyce in preparing the first Xhosa grammar and translations of religious materials. 
After a brief period of formal schooling at Salem, Shepstone entered government service on his eighteenth birthday, as interpreter of native languages at Cape Town. At the outbreak of the Cape Frontier War of 1834-5 he was appointed to the military headquarters staff of Sir Benjamin D'Urban. After the war he was appointed clerk and general interpreter to the agent-general responsible for British resident officers beyond the frontier. From the middle of 1836 to the end of 1838 he lived mostly at Grahamstown where he met his future wife, Maria (1816-1893), whose father, Charles Palmer, was responsible for military transport. On 11 November 1838 the couple married at the Cape Town home of Colonel Harry Smith. Eight days later Shepstone sailed with Major Samuel Charters's expeditionary force to Port Natal, whose hinterland was then convulsed by warfare between Boer settlers and the Zulu kingdom. After returning to Grahamstown in February 1839, Theophilus took up an appointment as resident agent at Fort Peddie, charged with the oversight of local Xhosa chiefs and the reservation set aside for Mfengu refugees. He enjoyed his life as adviser to chiefs and would seek, unsuccessfully, on several later occasions to convince British authorities to appoint him to administer some African territory where he might rule as supreme chief over a host of lesser chiefs, raising revenue from hut taxes and dispensing justice according to customary law. 
At the end of 1845 Shepstone moved to the new British colony of Natal, initially as diplomatic agent to natives, and subsequently secretary for native affairs. In this position for thirty years Shepstone wielded enormous power over the African population of the region. In the face of determined early opposition from officials and white settlers he succeeded in securing large reserved territories for exclusively African occupation. He also won Colonial Office approval for his policy of ruling the black population through their own chiefs in accordance with customary usages. In many ways his policy resembled the practice of 'indirect rule' by which much of British colonial Africa was governed in the first half of the twentieth century. Shepstone's first preference was for direct administration through magistrates with a solid grounding in Zulu language and culture. A shortage of resources forced him to make much greater use of chiefs than he had anticipated. His aim was gradually to supplant hereditary chiefs with appointed African officials whose positions would depend entirely on government preferment. Likewise, in relation to customary law, he hoped gradually to supplant African usages with European 'civilization'. Under his administration he elaborated a system of 'native law' to which virtually all Africans were subjected. His tolerance for polygamy and bride prices paid in cattle was condemned by most settlers and missionaries, but helped him, in the longer run, to acquire a reputation for tolerance motivated by a humane cultural relativism. The key to his early success was the raising of large sums through taxes and other charges levied on Africans. By the final years of his administration direct and indirect African contributions to the Natal treasury amounted to about three quarters of total government revenue. As an appointed member of the legislative council Shepstone was frequently attacked by white settler representatives who wanted to force more men into wage labour by reducing the land available for African occupation. Shepstone, however, could generally count on the support of large landowners who depended on rents paid by African tenants and by coastal sugar planters who looked to Shepstone to provide a steady flow of African migrant labourers from neighbouring territories. In his speeches to the legislative council Shepstone argued that any drastic reduction in African lands would inspire an armed rebellion that might quickly overwhelm the small white population. 
Shepstone's fear of uprisings, perhaps born of his experiences on the strife-torn eastern Cape frontier, seems to have been entirely genuine. At the slightest hint of opposition he showed African chiefs the iron fist concealed beneath the velvet glove of cultural tolerance. In 1848, when Chief Fodo refused an order, he and his people were chased by government forces over the southern boundary of the colony. In 1857 Shepstone ruthlessly crushed opposition from chiefs Sidoi and Matshana. He created an African police force commanded by his 'indunas', men whose loyal service was rewarded by grants of cattle and women seized in battle. He believed that his system of administration, underpinned by his system of taxation, could be successfully applied to virtually any African territory. He longed to be given the opportunity to prove his claim, and was, for twenty years, supported in his ambitions by the bishop of Natal, John William Colenso. Shepstone's father had always regretted the Wesleyan break with the Church of England, so it was not so surprising that the son was confirmed in the Anglican faith in 1850 and began a lifelong involvement in church affairs. Colenso gave a theological underpinning to Shepstone's toleration of African customs, while Shepstone enthusiastically endorsed the liberal reading of scripture which caused Colenso to be tried for heresy. On at least three different occasions Colenso and Shepstone discussed going as a team into a neighbouring African territory to try out their missionary and administrative theories. Their plans were firmly squashed by the high commissioner, Sir George Grey, who said that the scheme was 'nothing else than that Great Britain should establish a new kingdom in South Africa -- and make Mr. Shepstone the King of that country' (Gordon, 176). In 1868 Shepstone only narrowly failed to secure the annexation of Basutoland which would have vastly extended the scope of his administration. 
During the 1850s Colenso and Shepstone schemed to make Mkungu, one of the younger sons of the Zulu king Mpande, heir to his father's throne. By 1861 they had decided to throw their support behind another son, Cetshwayo. In a risky expedition, Shepstone went into Zululand to confer official British recognition on Cetshwayo as heir apparent. After the old ruler died Shepstone led a large delegation to install Cetshwayo as king (August 1873), an event that marked the high-water mark of his influence in Zulu affairs. At the end of the same year the long-standing friendship with Colenso dissolved in rounds of bitter recriminations over Shepstone's role in the capture and trial of the Hlubi chief Langalibalele, who had defied orders to hand in unregistered guns and tried to flee over the Drakensberg Mountains. The bishop now pronounced Shepstone's administration to be a corrupt tyranny and returned to England in an attempt to marshal support from various philanthropic societies. Shepstone was sent on behalf of the Natal government to convey its version of events to the colonial secretary, H. H. M. Herbert, fourth earl of Carnarvon. Although Carnarvon insisted on important reforms and sent Sir Garnet Wolseley to reform Natal's government, he was profoundly impressed by Shepstone's voluminous knowledge of African affairs both inside and outside the borders of the colonies. In 1876, when Shepstone travelled to England to participate in the conference Carnarvon had convened to promote the idea of federating the various states and colonies of southern Africa, he was promoted to the rank of KCMG (he had been made CMG in 1869), and designated to lead a delegation to the financially troubled Transvaal republic in January 1877. Invoking the secret commission he held to annex the territory if circumstances warranted, Shepstone raised the union flag on 18 April. For two tumultuous years he served as administrator of the Transvaal while recalcitrant Boers plotted to regain their independence, treasury officials complained that Shepstone's finances were a shambles, and his own misjudgement of African affairs sped on a military confrontation with neighbouring rulers. His advice to Carnarvon and the new high commissioner for South Africa, Sir Bartle Frere, was that the threat of a united rising of all the independent African polities must be countered by extending the mantle of British suzerainty over them all. He wrongly believed that Sekhukhuni's Pedi would crumble before an advance of British forces, and supported the impossible ultimatum Frere issued to the Zulu king in December 1878. Sekhukhuni's stalwart resistance and the catastrophic British defeat at the hands of Zulu forces at Isandlwana -- where Shepstone's fourth son, George John Palmer, perished -- called his judgement into question on precisely the ground on which he was supposed to be most capable. He relinquished his commission as administrator of the Transvaal in March 1879 and left the public service in 1880. 
After the election of 1880 brought Gladstone's Liberal government to power on a platform of anti-imperialism, Shepstone's name and work lay under a cloud. An uprising in the Transvaal led to re-establishment of a Boer republic, and Zululand was carved up into thirteen independent chieftainships. Shepstone found a champion in H. Rider Haggard, who had served on his staff in the Transvaal and whose book 'Cetewayo and his White Neighbours' (1882) argued for the wisdom of his old chief's policies. Haggard's subsequent novels, including 'King Solomon's Mines' and 'Allan Quatermain', helped popularize Shepstone's notion of governing Africans in accordance with their own customs and traditions. When it was decided to restore Cetshwayo as Zulu king in 1883, Shepstone emerged briefly from retirement to supervise the re-installation of the monarch. In the remaining decade of his life he had the satisfaction of seeing many of his sons and other relatives occupying important posts in African administration. Colonial opinion gradually came to regard Shepstone's policy of separate lands, laws, and leaders for the African population as the best way of ensuring the peaceful maintenance of white supremacy and reliable labour supplies. Later scholarship endorsed the judgement that he had been one of the chief architects of segregationist policies used to govern Africans in colonies stretching from the Cape to Kenya. Some have even gone so far as to give him the dubious distinction of having erected key pillars of the apartheid system which dominated South Africa for much of the twentieth century. 
Shepstone's wife died on 2 March 1893; he survived her by only a few months, succumbing to a respiratory illness on 23 June at Pietermaritzburg. He was buried two days later beside Maria in the old Anglican cemetery, Pietermaritzburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 25354


Sherard, James (1666-1738), apothecary and botanist, and son of George Sherard or Sherwood of Bushby in Leicestershire, and Mary, his second wife, was born at Bushby on 1 July 1666. William Sherard (1659-1728) was his brother. On 7 February 1682 he was apprenticed to Charles Watts, an apothecary, who was curator of the botanical gardens at Chelsea. Sherard worked hard as an apothecary, and by many years' practice in Mark Lane, London, accumulated an ample fortune. From about 1707 he acted as general factotum to the physician John Radcliffe. Sherard retired from the business about 1720. By then, the gout from which Sherard suffered had already forced him to give up his pursuit of music, at which he was a gifted amateur. He had earlier composed twenty-four trio sonatas, which were published in two collections, in 1701 and 1711. The first of these was dedicated to the second duke of Bedford, for whose family Sherard's brother, William, had worked as a tutor. Sherard's sonatas are all of the 'da chiesa' type, and owe much to Italian models. They were perhaps first performed by their composer, who was also an accomplished violinist. 
On his retirement Sherard purchased the manors of Evington and Settle in Leicestershire, but he chiefly resided at Eltham in Kent, where he pursued the cultivation of valuable and rare plants and his garden, with its hothouses, became noted as among the finest in England. An illustrated catalogue of his collection was published by Dillenius in 1732 as 'Hortus Elthamensis, sive, Plantarum rariorum quas in horto suo Elthami in Cantio collegit vir ornatissimus et praestantissimus Jac. Sherard, M.D., Reg. Soc. et Coll. Med. Lond. Soc. Catalogus'. Despite his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1706, Sherard was initially less well known as a botanist than his brother, William, as whose London agent he sometimes acted. By the 1720s, however, James Sherard's own reputation as a collector of rare plant specimens was established, and his discoveries of English plants had augmented those of Ray and others. He now travelled more widely in search of specimens, including trips to the continent, as well as keeping up correspondences and exchanges of plants with other botanists, notably Richard Richardson. During the 1730s, he also assisted with the management of the Chelsea gardens. 
In 1728 Sherard was appointed as executor of his brother William's will. After initial disputes, he negotiated his brother's endowment of a professorship of botany in the University of Oxford, J. J. Dillenius being the first Sherardian professor. James Sherard's administration of the trust led the University of Oxford to confer upon him the degree of doctor of medicine, by diploma dated 2 July 1731, and the Royal College of Physicians to admit him on 30 September 1732 to its fellowship without examination and without the payment of fees. He died on 12 February 1738, leaving a fortune reputed to amount to $150,000. He had married Susanna ('b'. 1669), daughter of Richard Lockwood, but they had no children. He was buried at Evington parish church, where his widow erected a marble tablet to his memory. She died on 27 November 1741. 


@@@@@


doc= 25355


Sherard, William (1659-1728), botanist, the second of six children and eldest son of a landowner, George Sherard (Sherwood), and Mary, his second wife, was born on 27 February 1659 at Bushby, a hamlet just outside Leicester. James Sherard (1666-1738) was a younger brother. The family's social position was sufficiently affluent for Sherard to attend Merchant Taylors' School in London in 1677, culminating in his being awarded in 1677 one of its coveted special fellowships at St John's College, Oxford, in theory reserved for poor scholars. These fellows were entitled to indefinite residence in the college as long as ('inter alia') they did not marry. Sherard chose to read law and, after graduating BCL in December 1683, having scholarly inclinations and apparently under no pressure to seek a more remunerative livelihood, he decided to stay on. 
Sherard early became captivated by the challenging diversity of the plant world and the need for a comprehensive system to impose order on this. While a student he had frequented the university's physic garden and there formed a lasting friendship with its new keeper, Jacob Bobart the younger, supplying plants, seeds, and many rare books to assist his task of completing Robert Morison's 'Plantarum historiae universalis Oxoniensis'. It was probably at Bobart's instance that in December 1685 he obtained five years' leave of absence, took up residence in Paris, and attended three of the renowned annual courses on botany given at the Jardin du Roi by Bobart's equivalent there, J. P. de Tournefort. Visiting the Netherlands, Sherard forged a strong link with the keeper of the Leiden Botanical Garden, Paul Hermann. The lists he compiled of the plants growing in these two outstandingly rich garden collections were rightly judged valuable enough to be turned into what was to be his only book, 'Schola botanica', published under the pseudonymous initials S. W. A. in 1689. Already, through his affability, unstinting helpfulness, and freedom to travel widely, his key role as a unifying agent in a badly fragmented European botanical community was starting to emerge. 
Sherard's compulsive cataloguing extended to the countryside as well as to gardens. An appendix to Ray's 'Synopsis' (1690) contains his plant records from across southern England; it also reveals that he had visited Jersey and discovered nine of that island's specialities. 
With his college still indulgent over his absence -- and having lost to Leonard Plukenet the post of 'queen's botanist' -- Sherard went to stay in 1690 with a young Irish baronet, Sir Arthur Rawdon, on his estate at Moira in co. Down. It has been supposed that he went as tutor to Sir Rawdon's one surviving son, but the age of the boy makes that unlikely and probably he was invited as botanical adviser and companion to Rawdon, who was himself a sophisticated horticulturist. Life at Moira evidently proved seductive, for the stay extended to about four years, a sacrifice of time which in later years Sherard came to regret; even so it was by no means wasted, for on forays into the Ulster countryside he added several species to the little-known Irish flora. After a brief return to Oxford, where he progressed to DCL in June 1694, Sherard departed for the continent that autumn, as tutor to Charles, Lord Townshend, on the latter's grand tour. Though travelling with a young nobleman opened all doors, formal visits left him with frustratingly little time for botany, much of which in any case had to be given over to completing Hermann's 'Paradisus Batavus', a catalogue of the plants growing in the Netherlands, which with characteristic generosity he undertook for Hermann's widow following its author's sudden death. 
No sooner was he back in England in November 1697 than Sherard left on a second grand tour, this time as tutor to the marquess of Tavistock, the young heir to the first duke of Bedford, and with the prospect of many months in Italy. They visited the chief cities, whose botanical gardens Sherard was able to examine with his customary thoroughness. It was during this trip that he apparently first seriously contemplated what was to be his central goal in life thereafter: a continuation of Bauhin's 'Pinax' of 1623, a task suggested to him by Tournefort. This entailed updating that list of all the names given by botanical authors to each species of plant known up to that time, an encyclopaedic endeavour foreshadowing today's 'Index Kewensis'. To this end he returned home with a large haul of rare books together with many herbarium specimens donated by leading Italian botanists. 
Sherard was back in England by Christmas 1698 with his thirst for travel temporarily assuaged, and two summers later gave in to repeated requests from the dowager duchess of Beaufort to tutor her grandson Henry, an introduction he owed to Sloane. The duchess took justifiable pride in the rich garden she had built up at Badminton and doubtless really wanted him for his botanical knowledge. In the event the position proved uncongenial and it must have been a relief when it was terminated by his pupil falling seriously ill. Meanwhile Sherard was coming under pressure to take some part in the affairs of his college, and in November 1700 he returned to act as junior bursar. This experience seems to have killed any remaining taste for Oxford life, for soon he was seeking openings elsewhere. In May 1702 he was appointed to a longstanding government commission set up to ensure better care of French and Spanish prisoners, at a stipend of $200 per annum. Though this was patently no more than a stopgap, it provided the college with grounds to declare his fellowship void the following April. 
A far better position then materialized -- consul at Smyrna for the Levant Company, 'a good post for honour and revenue' (Sherard to Royal Society, 1703, RS, Sherard MSS, letter 625), which he took in the full expectation that it would be for life. Although lucrative, lack of necessary books and poor communications with Europe impeded work on his 'magnum opus', while local botanizing proved feasible only with many companions for protection. His energies consequently became sidetracked into the collecting of coins and medallions and copying of church inscriptions, many of the latter published in Edmund Chisnell's 'Antiquitates Asiaticae' (1728). However, fortunately for botany, the country house at Sedi-Keui, seven miles outside Smyrna, which he had bought in 1711, was burgled and many of his coins stolen in the mistaken belief that they were silver. Their loss subverted this competing interest and took him back to the 'Pinax', but he was increasingly forced to recognize that his return to England was essential if that work was to progress further. 
Having reluctantly resigned his position, Sherard left for London in November 1716, but the intentionally leisurely journey back stretched out to a whole year when plague broke out on his ship and it was held in quarantine at Leghorn. On arriving home, sufficiently well off now to be able to devote all his time to botany, he settled into chambers in Barking Alley, resumed his London friendships, and stood for election to the Royal Society, going almost at once on to its council in 1720. About the same time his brother James, who had risen to great wealth as an apothecary, acquired an estate at Eltham, on the city's south-east outskirts, and, sharing his enthusiasm for botany, invited Sherard to assist him in his soon-realized aim of turning its garden and hothouses into the most richly stocked in Britain. In May 1721 the two travelled to the continent, partly to buy plants and partly to try to entice a rising young Hessian with expertise especially in mosses and fungi, Johann Jakob Dillenius, to move from Giessen to help with their respective projects. Dillenius succumbed and went to live in London with Sherard that autumn, but though both worked hard on the 'Pinax', its completion was held up by a temporary dispute between Sloane and Sherard, and the former's consequent denial to them of access to the collections of Plukenet and James Petiver. On top of Sherard's perfectionism and continuing distractions -- notably as an intermediary for aristocratic collectors -- this was eventually to prove the work's death-blow. 
In the meantime, though, work on the 'Pinax' continued to provide a justification for Sherard's unending botanical acquisitiveness. In 1721 he organized the dispatch of Mark Catesby back to North America to collect natural history specimens for a syndicate, and the next year rounded up another set of subscribers to send the 'pilgrim botanist', Thomas More, to do the same in New England. In 1722, however, the king of France outbid him for the herbarium of Sebastien Vaillant, who had died without completing his life work, the 'Botanicon Parisiense'. Before his death Vaillant had sought to persuade Hermann's successor at Leiden, Boerhaave, to complete it, and Sherard now prevailed upon that long-time friend of his to do so, promising his assistance. This required his making two more visits to the Netherlands preparatory to the book's publication in 1727. 
In the autumn of 1724, needing more space for arranging his herbarium and papers, Sherard moved with Dillenius to a house on Tower Hill, where the two bachelors were looked after by a housekeeper. But their enjoyment of these improved conditions was brief: by April 1728 Sherard was withering away there from what friends described as 'senile marasmus' and his death finally came during the night of 11-12 August. He was buried on 19 August in the churchyard at Eltham, but the precise location of his grave is now unknown. Two years earlier he had donated $500 towards the cost of enlarging the conservatory at the Oxford Physic Garden, along with many duplicate specimens and rare books for its library. In his will he further underlined his debt to his alma mater by bequeathing it his herbarium of some 12,000 specimens, his library of more than 600 volumes, his paintings, drawings, and the manuscript of the 'Pinax'. However, a series of conditions was attached: a new chair of botany was to be established at the botanic garden (for which $3000 was offered as its endowment), Dillenius was to be its occupant for life, and the university was to pay $150 annually towards the upkeep of the garden and its library. Seven years of wrangling over the details followed before his intentions were eventually realized and Dillenius took office in 1735 as the first Sherardian professor. By thus inserting into this key position one of Europe's ablest botanists, Sherard arguably achieved more for the study posthumously than all he accomplished during his lifetime. 
Three of his friends named genera in Sherard's honour, but it was the 'Sherardia' that Dillenius bestowed on field madder that later secured adoption by Linnaeus and has thereby been perpetuated. Another common British wild flower, 'Rosa sherardii', commemorates him at the species level. 


@@@@@


doc= 25356


Sheraton, Thomas (1751-1806), furniture designer and author, was a native of Stockton-on-Tees, co. Durham. His father, also named Thomas Sheraton ('b'. 1725/6, 'bur'. 1792), was a schoolmaster from whom he must have received an education, although he later described himself as a 'mechanic, and one who never received the advantages of a 'collegial' or 'academical' education' (T. Sheraton, 'A Scriptural Illustration of the Doctrine of Regeneration', 1782). Nevertheless, he must have obtained a good training in cabinet-making, perhaps from one of the cabinet-makers in the town, and in draughtsmanship possibly from the local shipbuilding traditions with which his future wife's family were connected. 
Sheraton's early years remain obscure. It seems unlikely that he ever set up a cabinet-making business of his own, probably because he lacked capital. He was described as having been 'for many years a journeyman cabinet maker' ('GM'), and he himself wrote in his 'Cabinet Dictionary' (1803): 'Having possessed a strong attachment and inclination for carving in my youth, I was necessarily induced to make attempts in this art, and was employed in the country occasionally in it' (Sheraton, 'Cabinet Dictionary', 136). His more profound interests lay elsewhere for by 1782, if not several years earlier, he had become a devout Baptist. In that year he published a tract entitled 'A Scriptural Illustration of the Doctrine of Regeneration', to which was added 'A Letter on the Subject of Baptism Written to a Gentlewoman at her Request', which expressed 'the sentiments of my heart'. On 8 February 1779 he married Margaret Mitchinson of Norton, co. Durham, with whom he is said to have had two children. He may also have found work as a draughtsman and drawing-master: two views of Stockton High Street, engraved 'after T Sheraton', were published by a local bookseller in 1785 and 1795. 
About 1790 Sheraton moved to London and was recorded at 4 Hart Street in 1791, 41 Davies Street in 1793, and 106 Wardour Street in 1795. His motives for moving south are unclear, but in 1791 his masterpiece, 'The Cabinet Maker and Upholsterer's Drawing-Book', began to be published by subscription in fortnightly sections (forty-two in all), priced 1's'. A slightly larger second edition appeared in 1794 and a third with some small amendments in 1802. A German version was translated by G. T. Wenzel and published in Leipzig. It was intended for practising members of the trade, and addressed 'to Cabinet-Makers and Upholsterers in General'. The 717 subscribers were almost entirely established furniture makers, in contrast to those of Thomas Chippendale's 'Gentleman and Cabinet Maker's Director' (1754, 1755, and 1762) which had included members of aristocracy and gentry. Sheraton's intention (inspired perhaps by his nonconformist background) was to improve the work of uneducated artisans by teaching them proportion and perspective drawing, since previous manuals had been deficient in this. He firmly believed in the immutable laws of 'Geometry and real Science' and wished to show how these could be applied to the ephemeral nature of taste particularly in furniture design. In his own words his intention was to make the 'Drawing Book' 'as permanently useful as I could and to unite with usefulness the taste of the times' (Sheraton, 'Drawing Book', 1802 edn, 355). 
Thus the first two parts were given over to geometry, perspective, and the orders of architecture, all deliberately calculated to the needs of furniture making. Parts three and four, on the other hand, described and illustrated 'a great variety of Original Designs' and ornamental details for fashionable middle-class furniture. The overall style was an elegant neo-classicism with a Francophile bias, in some cases reminiscent of the prince of Wales's architect, Henry Holland. Indeed, the 120 engravings (many of which were accompanied by interesting technical instructions) included views of the prince's Chinese drawing room at Carlton House. How far Sheraton was an innovator or merely following fashionable taste has been debated. He himself described how he had tried to collect ideas from the best sources (Sheraton, 'Drawing Book', 1802 edn, 353), and he was scrupulous in naming those from whom he had taken novel forms, as well as crediting himself where appropriate. In general his designs reflected the fashionable (but not aristocratic) taste of his time and the effect of his publication was to disseminate forms and ornament widely so that they remained in production (albeit often somewhat coarsened) for the next twenty-five years. 
About 1799 Sheraton returned to co. Durham, where he became a Baptist minister in the following year. By 1802 he had returned to London and was residing at 8 Broad Street. In 1803 he published his second furniture book, 'The Cabinet Dictionary', containing 134 engraved designs and a lengthy text. By this date avant-garde taste had moved towards the more massive and archaeologically correct vocabulary of classicism advocated by C. H. Tatham, but not yet popularized. Sheraton included ornamental features of this type in the dictionary, but married somewhat awkwardly to more conventional forms. The strength of the dictionary lay more in its detailed descriptions of the production, use, and function of different types of furniture and of the interiors for which they were intended. Its weakness was the author's verbosity and tendency to stray into irrelevant areas. 
During his first London period Sheraton's elegant trade card had described him as a teacher of 'Perspective, Architecture and Ornaments' who 'makes Designs for Cabinet-makers and sells all kinds of Drawing Books etc'. Despite this claim, only one manuscript design by Sheraton has survived: a pen and wash drawing for an ornate looking-glass dating from about 1790 (V&A). His only documented and extant commission is the piano ordered by Don Manuel de Godoy in 1796 for presentation to Queen Maria Louisa of Spain and made by Broadwood (now at the Heritage Foundation, Deerfield, Massachusetts). 
Sheraton continued to work as a draughtsman after his return to London in 1802, no doubt combining this with his duties as a Baptist minister. But he did not prosper. A glimpse of him is provided by the future publisher Adam Black, then seeking his fortune in London, and who worked for Sheraton briefly in 1804: 'He lived in an obscure street, his house half shop, half dwelling-house, and looked himself like a worn-out Methodist minister, with threadbare black coat... My host seemed a good man, with some talent. He had been a cabinetmaker, was now author and publisher, teacher of drawing, and, I believe, occasional preacher. I was with him for about a week, engaged in most wretched work, writing a few articles, and trying to put his shop in order, working among dirt and bugs, for which I was remunerated with half a guinea. Miserable as the pay was, I was half ashamed to take it from the poor man. (Fastnedge, 22-3)' Adam Black wondered 'how a man with such abilities and resources is in such a state? I believe his abilities and resources are his ruin, in this respect, for by attempting to do everything he does nothing' (ibid.). 
The work to which Black was asked to contribute was Sheraton's last and most ambitious project, 'The Cabinet-Maker, Upholsterer, and General Artists' Encyclopaedia'. It was to be published in 125 parts by subscription; in the event only thirty sections, from A to C, appeared before the author's death in 1806. The entries were rambling and eccentric, suggesting a loss of mental faculties. The plates, despite being poorly produced, showed stylish furniture in the new early Regency taste. One thousand copies were sold, Sheraton having travelled to Ireland to solicit customers. He died at his home, 8 Broad Street, London, on 22 October 1806 'of a phrenitis', leaving his wife, Margaret, and their two children 'in distressed circumstances' ('GM'), and was buried on 27 October at St James's, Piccadilly, London. In 1812 eighty-four of Sheraton's plates, compiled from all his publications, were reissued by J. Taylor as a single folio volume entitled 'Designs for Household Furniture by the Late Thomas Sheraton'. 
Sheraton's influence on furniture design was widespread and lasted for at least a generation, not only with successful firms in Britain such as Gillows, but in America and Europe. His plea for an understanding of geometry, proportion, and perspective by aspiring artisans was eventually implemented by the curricula of the government schools of design which became established after the parliamentary enquiry of 1835. During the late Victorian period Sheraton's name became synonymous with the elegant furniture of the 1790s. A facsimile reprint of the 'Drawing Book' published in 1895 helped to promote a revival of the beautifully proportioned and finely executed furniture he had advocated. 


@@@@@


doc= 25357


Sherborn, Robert (c.1454-1536), bishop of Chichester, was born at Basingstoke, Hampshire, admitted as a scholar of Winchester College in 1465, and went to New College, Oxford, in 1472, where he was a fellow until 1486. He graduated BA in 1477, and subsequently MA and BM. He was the scribe (secretary) to the university, 'c'.1480-86. An example of his hand survives in his transcription of 1481 of a Salernitan medical text (Edinburgh University Library, MS 169). 
While still at Oxford, in 1482, Sherborn received a prebend of Salisbury Cathedral. When in 1486 he became secretary to Archbishop John Morton of Canterbury (died 1500), further preferment followed rapidly, although, surprisingly, he received no benefices in Canterbury diocese. In 1486 he became treasurer of Hereford, and in successive years from 1488 to 1490 received prebends at Lincoln, St Paul's, and Wells. In 1492 he was admitted as warden of Kingsthorpe Hospital, Northamptonshire, and master of St Cross Hospital, Winchester. As well as various rectories thereafter (the first, Childrey in Berkshire, was granted in March 1491), he secured a prebend at Chichester. In the diocese of Lincoln he was successively archdeacon of Huntingdon (1494-6) and Buckingham (1496-1505); he was also archdeacon of Taunton (1496-1505), and in 1499 (when he was ordained subdeacon) was elected dean of St Paul's. Only on 6 March 1501 was he ordained priest. 
Between 1490 and 1492 Sherborn administered for the archbishop during vacancies in the sees of Lichfield, Hereford, Wells, Exeter, and Winchester. In 1494 he first appears in royal service, supervising the building of the new tower at Portsmouth. By 1496 he was secretary and councillor to Henry VII, and in July of that year he conducted his first diplomatic mission to Rome, where he was sent to signify the king's willingness to join the Holy League. He returned there in 1504 to seek from Julius II ('r'. 1503-13) a papal dispensation for the marriage of Prince Henry to the widowed Katherine of Aragon. On his first visit he became warden of the English hospice, which was now transformed by Henry VII into a royal institution. Although Sherborn acted by deputy, he drew up new statutes, remedied the dangerous financial situation, and spent lavishly on the reconstruction of the church, rededicated in 1501. 
Back in England, between 1498 and 1500 Sherborn was engaged in the exaction of heavy fines on the west-country adherents of Perkin Warbeck, and in summer 1503 was one of the commissioners who treated with Scottish envoys about Princess Margaret's dowry. In the new reign, and after his elevation to the episcopate, his diplomatic role was more ceremonial; he received Cardinal Campeggi in Kent in 1518 and again in 1528, while in 1522 he was sent to greet Charles V ('r'. 1519-56) at Calais and escort him to London. 
On 5 January 1505 Sherborn was provided by the pope to the see of St David's. Allegations that he forged the bull of provision were undoubtedly a gross exaggeration. The point at issue -- an erasure and the inflation of the income of St Cross, Winchester, which he was to retain but which he also restored -- was magnified to suit the interests of competing ecclesiastical factions in England and at Rome. Sherborn was vigorously supported by the king, and was consecrated on 11 May 1505. Within three years Henry VII was pressing for his translation to Chichester, to which he was provided by Julius II on 18 September 1508. 
Analysis of the records of Sherborn's administration at Chichester has shown that he was an active and effective diocesan bishop. He engaged upon a campaign to increase episcopal authority by a thoroughgoing reform of the church courts, which were amalgamated so as to eliminate competing jurisdictions, and he was prepared to pay Cardinal Wolsey to preserve their independence from legatine intervention. He was active as diocesan in monastic visitation, in which he had been well trained as Morton's commissary, and was also commissioned by Wolsey to conduct the legatine visitation of Premonstratensian Bayham, Sussex. He made a concerted attempt both to improve the condition of the fabric of parish churches, and to maintain and foster the standards of pastoral ministry. He was greatly assisted by administrators recruited from the alumni of New College, and in 1524 he founded in his cathedral church four new 'Wiccamical' prebends, reserved for former scholars of Winchester and New College. To the latter foundation he gave a message at Harrow, Middlesex, to provide for masses for the scholars' souls, and land near High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, to provide a stipend for a scholar. A visitor in 1526 complimented the furbishment of his episcopal palace and its fine grounds. Sherborn also oversaw, and was most probably responsible for commissioning, two large historical panel paintings for the cathedral. The panels ('c'.1535-6) were the work of Lambert Barnard and depict former bishops and kings of England. 
By the time of the crisis of the early 1530s Sherborn was a very old man, described in 1532 as 'aged and sickly' ('LP Henry VIII', 5.506), although in 1535 as 'in good health and merry' ('LP Henry VIII', 8.402). He was by generation and inclination a member of the 'conservative episcopate', but he bowed to reality by renouncing papal jurisdiction on 26 February 1534, and on 15 June 1535 preached personally in Chichester Cathedral when announcing the king's supreme headship of the Church of England. On 1 June, however, he was examined by Dr Richard Layton (died 1544), and in early June of the next year, at the king's request, he resigned his see. On the following 21 August he died at Chichester, and was buried in an altar tomb, with alabaster effigy, in the south ambulatory of the cathedral choir. His last will, orthodox in tone and sentiment, was made nineteen days before his death, and proved on 24 November 1536. His career is an excellent example of one who laboured hard in the service both of his king and of the universal church, in the last years when such loyalties were compatible. 


@@@@@


doc= 25358


Sherbrooke, Sir John Coape (1764-1830), army officer and governor-in-chief of British North America, was baptized on 29 April 1764 at Arnold, Nottinghamshire, the third son of William Sherbrooke JP, born Coape, of Farnah in Duffield, Derbyshire, and Arnold, Nottinghamshire, who had taken the name of Sherbrooke on his marriage in 1756 to Sarah, one of the three coheirs of Henry Sherbrooke of Oxton, Nottinghamshire. John was commissioned as ensign in the 4th foot in December 1780 and promoted lieutenant in December 1781. He was given a company in the 85th foot in March 1783, and in June 1784 became captain in the 33rd foot, then stationed in Nova Scotia; he returned to Britain in 1786. Having advanced to major in September 1793 and lieutenant-colonel in May 1794, Sherbrooke served with his regiment successively in the Netherlands, the Cape, and finally India. He was promoted colonel in January 1798, and fought in the Anglo-Mysore War of 1799. His health suffered so severely that in January 1800 he had to return to England, where he was placed on half pay in 1802. The following year he took command of the 4th reserve battalion in the eastern counties. 
In January 1805 Sherbrooke advanced to major-general and in June was sent to Sicily, where he became commander of the troops at Messina. He went to Egypt in May 1807 on a diplomatic mission. During the first half of 1808 he took temporary command of all British forces in Sicily. Although French activities in southern Italy made his duties arduous, he resolutely confounded the intrigues of the court at Palermo. Henry Edward Bunbury, a fellow officer, described Sherbrooke as 'a short, square, hardy little man, with a countenance that told at once the determined fortitude of his nature. Without genius, without education, hot as pepper, and rough in his language, but with a warm heart and generous feelings; true, strait forward, scorning finesse and craft and meanness. (Bunbury, 329)' Having been relieved by Sir John Stuart, Sherbrooke went home in June 1808. He transferred to the 68th foot in May 1809, and served in the Peninsular campaign, with the local rank of lieutenant-general, as second in command to Arthur Wellesley. In recognition of his exploits in the battles of Porto and Talavera, Sherbrooke was made KCB in September 1809. Ill health again forced him to return to England the following May. In June 1811 he became lieutenant-general and on 19 August was appointed lieutenant-governor of Nova Scotia. Five days later he married Katherine (Katherina), the daughter of the Revd Reginald Pyndar, rector of Madresfield, at Areley Kings, Worcestershire. 
From his arrival in Halifax on 16 October, Sherbrooke's governorship was dominated by war with the United States, which broke out in June 1812, and measures for the colony's defence. At first the dictates of security and commerce encouraged him to adopt a friendly stance towards the New England states where there existed hostility to the war and a willingness to continue trading with the maritime provinces of Canada by licences as well as clandestinely. This uneasy but highly profitable relationship ended in 1814 when the defeat of Napoleon in Europe induced the British authorities to act more aggressively towards the United States government by occupying part of what was to become Maine. In August Sherbrooke commanded an expeditionary force which landed at Castine and successfully subdued the region between the Penobscot and the Sainte Croix rivers. This remained a British enclave for eight months, though Sherbrooke himself returned to Halifax within four weeks. A grateful house of assembly later voted him $1000 for the purchase of plate, and in January 1815 he received the GCB. 
On 10 April 1816 Sherbrooke was commissioned governor-in-chief of British North America, and arrived at Quebec on 12 July. Confronted by bitter strife between English and French parties, which had been aggravated by the conduct of Governor Sir George Prevost during the American war, he resolved to avoid becoming drawn into partisan politics and to pursue instead a neutral, conciliatory course. His broad-church Anglicanism posed no obstacle to cultivating a cordial rapport with the influential leader of the Roman Catholic clergy, Bishop Joseph-Octave Plessis, who was given a seat on the legislative council in 1818. Another valuable political ally was Louis-Joseph Papineau, the youthful, ambitious speaker of the assembly, later the scourge of less accommodating governors. This good understanding facilitated a temporary settlement of the province's chaotic and contentious financial affairs. In 1818 detailed consideration by the lower house of the annual estimates led to the voting of supplies to cover the ordinary expenditures of government, without recognition of the assembly's disputed right to control all forms of local revenue. Unfortunately, resort to the procedure of an address, rather than a regular appropriation bill, meant that no legislative precedent was established which might have moderated future wrangling over this crucial issue. Nevertheless, despite a fierce temper and an instinctive conservatism, Sherbrooke achieved singular success in operating the constitution of Lower Canada harmoniously and gaining the confidence of all parties, to the enhancement of his own reputation. 
Still dogged by ill health, and having been afflicted by a paralytic stroke in February 1818, Sherbrooke resigned his commission and returned that August to Britain. He was promoted general in May 1825 and lived quietly at Calverton in Nottinghamshire. He died there on 14 February 1830 and was buried at nearby Oxton, survived by his wife, who died childless on 15 May 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 25359


Sherburne, Sir Edward (bap. 1616, d. 1702), translator and poet, was baptized with his twin brother John on 27 September 1616 at St Giles Cripplegate, London, the son of Edward Sherburne (1578-1641), government official and secretary of the East India Company, and his wife, Frances ('bap'. 1588, died 1673), the daughter of John Stanley of Roydon Hall, Essex, and his wife, Beatrix. His grandfather Henry Sherburne, a descendant of Sir Richard Sherburne of Stonyhurst, Lancashire, had grown prosperous from modest beginnings as a groom at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He was the elder of the twins, and there were four other children in the family. 
The family lived in Goldsmith's Rents, where Sherburne's schoolmaster, as he recalled to Anthony Wood in 1686, was the famous classicist Thomas Farnaby: 'about the yeare 1624; I began as I may truly call it my Ludus literarius, for I began very early, and by Reason of the Neighbourhood of my Fathers House, being joyned to the Backside of Mr. Farnabyes, us'd to play among the schollars in long Coats. I continued till the Yeare 1634. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F.44, fol. 272'r')' At that time Farnaby moved out of London, and his assistant, the poet Charles Aleyn, became Sherburne's private tutor. Other writers of Sherburne's acquaintance included Thomas Carew, Robert Herrick, Thomas May, Thomas Randolph, and James Shirley. On 5 February 1638 the king granted Sherburne the reversion of his father's clerkship of the office of ordnance. 
Sherburne wrote a prefatory poem for Aleyn's verse 'Historie' of Henry VII (1638) and another for Ovid's 'Heroical Epistles' (1639), translated by his brother John, who died the following year. His father: 'thought fitt for my better Education to send Me abroad to travell. I sett forward just at Xmas 1640 and continued abroad till the End of (41) haveing spent my Time in viewing a considerable Part of France; and was intended for a Journey into Italy, but then unfortunately calld back by Occasion of my Fathers Sicknesse, who not many Weeks after my Returne dyed some few Dayes before Xmas in the End of (41). (MS Wood F.44, fol. 272'v')' 

Sherburne succeeded his father at a difficult time for the ordnance officers: on 17 August 1642 the House of Lords committed them to custody for refusing to issue munitions without the king's warrant. On 9 September they were ordered to be freed but not restored to their positions. Six days later Sherburne's mother, 'having Two Sons usually living with her, who are now with the King', was ordered to be removed from their house in the Tower ('JHL', 1642-3, 448). Sherburne served Charles at the battle of Edgehill on 23 October, and on 22 November the king, holding a council of war at Reading, sent him and others with ordnance to Oxford. He was styled commissary, and his brother Henry (killed in 1646) initially worked in the Oxford ordnance office too. On 20 December both were admitted MA by the king's special command. 
Eventually, after the battle of Naseby on 14 May 1645, hostilities moved west and the Oxford ordnance office was reduced until its members 'were gathered by Sherburne himself into an ordinary troop, which was allowed to remain as part of the garrison' (Roy, 1.57). After Oxford's surrender in the following June, he moved back to London, where he lived for some time in the Middle Temple chambers of his cousin John Povey. There he became friends with a more distant relative, Thomas Stanley, for whose 'Poems and Translations' (1647) he wrote commendatory verses and also (in some copies) 'Epithalamion' on Stanley's marriage. The following year Sherburne published his verse translations of Seneca's 'Medea' and 'Answer to Lucilius his quaere; why good men suffer misfortunes seeing there is a divine providence?' He dedicated and presented the latter to ''the King of Sorrows'', Charles I, who might perceive in it 'a glympse of Your own invincible 'Patience' and inimitable 'Magna[ni]mity'; in bearing and ever-mastering 'Mis-fortunes'' (sigs. A2'v'-3'r'). Sherburne tactfully omitted the concluding lines, 'being a Stoicall Exhortation to the Anticipation of Death' (ibid., 30). 
After Charles's execution Sherburne shared Stanley's retirement in the country homes of the latter's family at Cumberlow Green, Hertfordshire, and parents-in-law at Flower, Northamptonshire. Stanley encouraged his studying French and Italian poets, who are well represented in Sherburne's collection, dedicated to Stanley, 'Poems and Translations Amorous, Lusory, Morall, Divine' (1651). These are virtually all translations; indeed, 'Sherburne can hardly be credited with having written original poems at all' (Praz, 290). They have value, however, as evidence of literary fashion. The same year he contributed a commendatory poem to William Cartwright's posthumous 'Comedies; Tragi-Comedies, with other Poems'. 
When young Sir George Savile (later marquess of Halifax) returned from his travels, Sherburne later wrote, 'about the years 1651 or 1652 I was invited to tak upon Me the Charge of his Concernes' (MS Wood F.44, fol. 273'r'). Sherburne has been identified with the Saviles' steward of the same name at Rufford, Northamptonshire, who was involved in an intended insurrection in March 1655. Sir George's mother recommended Sherburne 'to undertake the Tuition of her Nephew Sr: Jo: Coventry in his Travells abroad', setting out at the beginning of that same month and, 'Haveing run through All France, Italy, some Part of Hungary, the Greater Part of Germany, Holland, and the Rest of the low Countries, and Flandres, returning Home about the End of October 1659' (MS Wood F.44, fol. 273'r'). In Europe, Sherburne conversed with learned men and at Paris in September 1656 began work on Manilius. 
Sherburne preserved the ordnance records during his sequestration. On 17 May 1660 he and the storekeeper Richard Marsh petitioned the House of Lords to restore them to their places; but a counter-claim by the incumbents frustrated them until they successfully petitioned the privy council, probably in June. Subsequently Sherburne asked the Council for '943'l'. 9's'. 8died owing to his late father, as clerk of the Ordnance in 1641, and for much larger arrears due to himself as his successor, to enable him to pay his father's debts' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 229). He was disappointed by a pension of only $100; but he worked hard and conscientiously, remaining at his post throughout the great plague of 1665. He served on the commission for saltpetre in 1666. 
Sherburne shared an interest in astronomy with the surveyor-general of the ordnance, Sir Jonas Moore, and the treasurer, George Wharton. Sherburne's 'Sphere of Marcus Manilius Made an English Poem' (1675) was long in preparation and printing; it translated the first of the 'Astronomica''s five books, 'with ample notes displaying a wide reading but no great acuteness or alertness of mind' (Housman, 1.xv). Sherburne advertised this attractively illustrated folio as an initiation for young gentlemen 'in the first Rudiments of Sphericall Learning' (MS Wood F.44, fol. 273'r'). The catalogue of 'the most eminent astronomers, ancient & modern' attracted particular attention. He next published another translation of Seneca: 'Troades: or the Royal Captives' (1679). Nahum Tate's collection 'Poems, by Several Hands and on Several Occasions' (1685) included 'The Graces, or Hieron', translated by Sherburne from Theocritus 'above forty years ago' (p. 151). 
On 6 January 1683 Charles II knighted Sherburne: 'in consideration of his great sufferings, and the long and faithful services by him performed... having also suffered several indignities from the faction at the time of the Popish Plot, who endeavoured to out him of his Place, for being, as they supposed, a Rom. Cath. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.19)' The Sherburne family was known for recusancy -- notably the Stonyhurst branch -- but Sherburne is said only to have 'turn'd Roman Catholick in King 'Charles' II's time' (Boyer, 232). He had taken the oaths required by the 'Test Act' in 1673. (Several Catholic items appear in his library catalogue of 1670 -- now BL, Sloane MS 857, fols. 182-94.) He remained financially insecure: on 7 December 1686 his petition for 'the arrears of his patent fees, amounting to 720'l'. 2's'. 6died, out of the rebels' estate in the West' was referred to the lord treasurer ('CSP dom.', '1686-7', 315); and a year later he hoped Anthony Wood might find him a college lease, for which a relative was providing him a lump sum. 
On 28 August 1688 Wood dined with Sherburne, who told him 'he had received orders to give out ammunition and armes for the ships and several seaport townes' ('Life and Times', 3.276). When King James had to replace the Tower's lieutenant, Sherburne wrote on 4 December, 'We are like to fare yet worse, for Orange they say demands the Towre to be deliverd up to him, trusting in that more then a free Parliamt' (MS Wood F.44, fol. 285'r'). A week later he informed Lord Dartmouth, master-general of the ordnance, 'this morning the Lord Lucas, now Lieutenant of the Tower, showed me a warrant from the Lords Spiritual and Temporal for removing me, as a Roman Catholic, out of the Tower' ('Dartmouth MSS', 3.136). After initially objecting, he complied. On 18 January 1689 he begged Dartmouth to let Thomas Townsend deputize and himself retain the clerkship's profits, but in August, after he refused to take the oath and declaration, his successor was sworn in. 
Sherburne planned further translations but completed only one: 'The Comparison of Pindar and Horace' (1696) from the French of Francois Blondel. He lent Richard Bentley, who was editing Manilius, materials collected by Jean-Gaspard Gevaerts, from which Bentley sent a tract by Albert Rubens to Johann Georg Graevius for publication. Bentley's enemies at Christ Church, Oxford, however, published Sherburne's complaint that Graevius had acknowledged Bentley instead of himself; Bentley fully explained the matter in his revised 'Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris' (1699). By this time Sherburne was impoverished: on 27 January 1698 he petitioned the crown for some of $1048 10's'. owing to him 'that he may pay his debts and be relieved from his starving condition' ('CSP dom.', '1698', 53). On 9 April he was allowed $100 'in consideration of [his] great age and distressed condition' ('CSP dom.', 187). Similar petitions and grants followed in 1699, 1701, and 1702. 
In 1701 Sherburne reflected, 'tis in vaine to strive / To play the Poet well at Eighty five' (BL, Sloane MS 829, fol. 2'v'). He did, however, publish his collected translations of Seneca's 'Tragedies' (1702), adding 'Phaedra and Hippolytus' and reprinting 'The Rape of Helen' from his collection of 1651. In his prefatory 'Brief discourse concerning translation' he strikes an old-fashioned note defending his 'close Adherence' to the words of the original -- obviously a response to Dryden's practice and theory. But Sherburne's verse, accomplished and often elegantly phrased, had rarely shown the independence of mind that distinguishes the best seventeenth-century poetry, even some of his friend Stanley's. He dedicated the 'Tragedies' to young Richard Francis Sherburne of Stonyhurst, Sir Nicholas's son, in gratitude for his family's 'many Favours'. On 4 November 1702 he died, probably at Holborn, and was buried four days later in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula at the Tower of London, towards the east end, on the north side near the wall. Although he composed an inscription for Sir Nicholas to use, a memorial tablet was placed there only in 1912. No will survives, nor record of his having married. Sir Hans Sloane, who had known him, bought some of his manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 25360


Sherer, Moyle (1789-1869), army officer and writer, youngest son of Joseph Sherer of Southampton, was born in that city on 18 February 1789. He was descended from the Moyles of Bake in Cornwall. From 1801-7 he attended Winchester College, but left on obtaining a commission in the 34th regiment of foot. In 1809 his corps was ordered to Portugal, and took part in the engagements of Albuera, Arroyo dos Molinos, and Vitoria. In the summer of 1813 Sherer was taken prisoner at the pass of Maya, and was moved to France, where he remained for two years, living chiefly at Bayonne. 
In 1818 the 34th went out to Madras, from where Sherer sent home the manuscript of 'Sketches of India' (1821), which went through four editions. Encouraged by its success, Sherer produced several more books after his return to England in 1823. 'Recollections of the Peninsula' (1823) reached five editions and led Sherer into correspondence with Sir William Napier over Sir John Moore's campaign. This was followed by two travel books, 'Scenes and Impressions in Egypt and Italy' (1824), and 'A Ramble in Germany' (1826). While in India, Sherer had imbibed evangelical religious views, and, anxious to promote them among his comrades in the army, published in 1827 a treatise named 'Religio militis'. He also wrote works of fiction and biography. Some, such as his 'Life of Wellington' (1830-32), proved popular; others, such as 'The Broken Font' (1837), did not. Perhaps because Sherer's works were published without his name, he has been variously (and apparently erroneously) referred to as Joseph Moyle and Joseph Moyle Sherer. 
A keen soldier, Sherer was promoted to a brevet majority in 1830 and became captain in the 96th regiment in 1831, before being placed on half pay in 1832. He had little taste for garrison life, and retired from the army about 1836, to Claverton Farm, near Bath. He remained for many years in the same neighbourhood, but he became mentally ill and had to move from his home at Combe Hay, Somerset, to Brislington House, near Bristol. He died there on 15 November 1869, and was buried in Brislington churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 25361


Sherfield, Henry (bap. 1572, d. 1634), lawyer and iconoclast, was baptized on 13 September 1572 at Winterbourne Earls, near Salisbury, the third son and one of five children of Richard Sherfield or Shervill ('c'.1535- 'c'.1620), corn dealer and small farmer, and his wife, Matilda Martin, daughter of John Martin. His life before 1607, when his voluminous papers begin, is badly documented. In 1608 he said that he had been educated 'as well in the country schools as afterwards in the university' (Jervoise MSS, L64/1), but no evidence has been discovered of his presence at either Oxford or Cambridge. He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1598, at the relatively late age of twenty-six, and seems to have spent some time before then in Southampton, possibly working as clerk to a local lawyer. He was called to the bar in 1606. 
Sherfield's religious inclinations may have been formed in the puritan environment of his inn. They must also have been shaped by reaction against those of his father. Richard Sherfield described himself late in life as a 'recusant' (Jervoise MSS, L67, testament in box 3), and that slur was also cast against other members of the family. But Richard's recusancy was intriguingly eclectic, combining a Catholic adoration of the five wounds of Christ with a decidedly sectarian interest in Christology. Sherfield's orthodox Calvinism was at odds with both of these. He also distinguished himself from his father and brothers in his capacity to channel his energy and ability into a successful career. He rapidly became a leading counsel in the court of wards and the favourite of its attorney, Sir James Ley. In 1610 he acted as intermediary in passing a bribe of a gilt cup to Ley, not without qualms of conscience recorded in his private fee book; but thereafter he carefully kept his hands clean of overt corruption, using his clients and patrons, like the Cecils and the Sackvilles, in more acceptable ways to reinforce both his London practice and his influence in the country. 
Sherfield's local influence was firmly rooted in the triangle bounded by Salisbury, Southampton, and Winchester. It was strengthened by his marriage in 1607 to Mary Hodgson (died 1613), daughter of a Winchester councillor and widow of George Bedford, a rich Salisbury clothier. Sherfield continued some of Bedford's business activities, including woad and madder growing, and retained an eye for opportunities in small-scale farming, while pursuing his legal and political career from a house in Salisbury and rooms in Lincoln's Inn. He was elected MP for Southampton in 1614 and 1621, and served as the town's recorder from 1618. In 1617 he joined the Wiltshire bench as JP, and in the same year he was appointed steward of the earl of Salisbury's west country estates, using his eldest brother, Richard, as his deputy. He had a finger in several pies, and seems deliberately to have been building a power base for his clan. 
Though more successful than his brothers, Sherfield shared their prickly temperament. He was quick to take offence and acutely sensitive to threats to his reputation. When William Cecil, second earl of Salisbury, dismissed Richard as deputy steward in 1624, Sherfield wrote to the earl expressing the 'passion which worms discover when they are tread upon' (Jervoise MSS, L2/15). His papers show something of the 'violent' character attributed to him by his enemies (TNA: PRO, SP 16/55/64). They also reveal a profound and calculating introspection. He more than once worked out the costs and benefits of his marriage to Mary, who brought him an estate of $3000 but also six stepchildren still unprovided for. (He had only one child of his own, Matilda, born in 1610.) After Mary's death in 1613, he carefully reassessed his chances in the marriage market, hoping for a rich widow or even Ley's daughter, while proclaiming (to a brother) that he counted 'the selling of my body... a most base, vile and abominable thing' (ibid., L67, box 2). In 1616 he married Rebecca, 'nee' Bailey (died 'c'.1655), widow of Henry Long of Whaddon, a minor Wiltshire gentleman and one of his clients. That was a move up the social scale, although it brought the responsibility of a further eight stepchildren, and produced (he alleged) a profit of only $555. Yet it was a close and companionate marriage. Rebecca's letters, extending over fourteen years until her eyesight failed, are full of love and concern and reflect a shared puritan piety and considerable mutual trust. 
Despite his calculation, Sherfield's finances were always precarious. In the 1620s he was earning as much as $400 a year at the bar, but burdened by the need to provide for a large extended family, and by his readiness to stand surety for his kinsfolk and for friends and clients such as Sir George Wrottesley and Sir Thomas Jervoise. His ambitions and his affections led him into obligations he might have been wise to avoid. His political fortunes were given a considerable boost, however, by his election as recorder of Salisbury in 1623. Already a significant figure in the vestry of St Edmund's parish, where he led a godly party including John Ivie and Peter Thatcher, the rector, he was now able to pursue their programme of civic and social reformation. As Sherfield said, they prided themselves on being engaged in 'wars with the drunkard, with the profane swearer, with the maypole-dancer, with every loose man and swaggerer', despite the accusations of 'preciseness' and the label of 'puritan' which they earned from their opponents in and around the cathedral (Jervoise MSS L67, speech in box 3). Their goal was 'a reformation, a true and real reformation' of the city (ibid., L38/54). In 1630 Sherfield sealed their triumph by obtaining a new charter, confirming the town's independence of the bishop and the close. 
As MP for Salisbury from 1624 to 1629, Sherfield sought similar success in parliament, where he could count on support from Jervoise and (after 1625) Walter Long, his stepson. In 1625 he was one of the first to oppose not only Buckingham, 'a cause of all our calamity' (Jervoise MSS, L21/1), but also Richard Montague and the Arminians. Though toning down some of the zealous rhetoric he employed in Salisbury, and billing himself instead as a 'good commonwealthsman' (ibid., L39/8), he was a consistent hammer of papists and introduced a bill for the protestant education of their children. In 1626 he also drafted a bill to encourage municipal brewhouses like that being used in Salisbury for relief of the poor, and he supported William Noy in his attempt to reform the poor laws. He spoke against martial law and the collection of tonnage and poundage, and collected materials on parliamentary privilege. At the same time, he was buying property in order to gain a controlling interest for himself and his kin in the pocket borough of Old Sarum. Sherfield was aspiring to a commanding parliamentary presence he never quite achieved, however; and after the dissolution of 1629 his prospects collapsed. Opposition to the crown had landed Long in the Tower, Sherfield's creditors were pressing, and he was arrested for the debts of his brother Richard. 
Against this background, Sherfield's smashing of a stained-glass window in St Edmund's Church, Salisbury, in October 1630 -- one of the most famous acts of iconoclasm of the century -- looks like an attempt to prop up his local position and reassert his authority. Instead it brought his world crashing about his ears. The window, showing God creating 'the sun and moon with a pair of compasses in his hand', had troubled Sherfield's 'conscience by the space of twenty years, for that he could not come into the church, but he must see it, sitting right opposite to it'. The vestry had authorized its taking down, but Bishop John Davenant issued an injunction protecting it. Determined to 'preserve a good conscience' and remove 'an occasion of idolatry', the recorder, 'all in black' and muttering to himself, witnesses alleged, attacked the image with 'a black staff with a pike in the end of it'. He was summoned before Star Chamber in 1633, with the king himself supervising the arrangements and Noy prosecuting. His supporters put up the best defence they could, John Ivie, for example, even testifying that he had seen Sherfield 'divers times' kneel to receive communion. Among his judges, who included a hostile William Laud and Richard Neile, only Edward Sackville, fourth earl of Dorset, gave him any real support, advocating leniency in order to avoid 'the tumults of the rude ignorant people in the countries where this gentleman... hath been a good governor' ('State-Trials', 1.400-04, 415). Although he retained his place as recorder, he was fined $500, forced to make public submission to Davenant, and effectively destroyed. 
Sherfield continued to believe his 'afflictions and crosses' the work of a benign divine providence: 'Did not God support me, I should have let go my hold long ere this' (Jervoise MSS, L32/39). In 1633, when he had to humiliate himself before Davenant, when fire destroyed his house at Winterbourne, and when even his own city of Salisbury called him to account for civic funds, it must have been difficult to cling on. He died early in the following year, intestate, with his financial affairs hopelessly and deliberately tangled, and with debts put at $6000. He was buried in St Edmund's churchyard on 28 January 1634. His papers, the remarkable archive of a man impelled to justify himself and to square driving ambition with a godly conscience, came into the possession of Sir Thomas Jervoise, once his debtor and now the chief of his creditors. 


@@@@@


doc= 25362


Sheridan, Caroline Henrietta (1779-1851), novelist, was the second daughter of Colonel James Callander (afterwards Sir James Campbell, 1745-1832) and his third wife, Lady Elizabeth Helena (died 1796), youngest daughter of Alexander Macdonnell, fifth earl of Antrim. Caroline Callander, one of the beauties of her day, was married on 21 June 1805 to Thomas (Tom) Sheridan (1775-1817), the son of Richard Brinsley Sheridan, and was mother of 'the three graces': Caroline Elizabeth Sarah Norton; Helen Selina Hay, countess of Gifford; and Jane Georgiana, duchess of Somerset. They also had four sons, three of whom predeceased their mother. 
In 1813 Caroline Sheridan accompanied her husband to the Cape of Good Hope, where, while serving the office of colonial treasurer, he died of consumption on 12 September 1817. She received a small pension, and rooms in Hampton Court Palace were given to her by the prince regent. She published three novels: 'Carwell, or, Crime and Sorrow' (1830), which was designed to expose the inequitable sentences pronounced upon those who had been guilty of forgery; 'Aims and Ends' (1833); and 'Oonagh Lynch' (1833). 'Carwell' was also published in a French edition. She died on 9 June 1851, at 39 Grosvenor Place, London, the house of her daughter Lady Dufferin. 


@@@@@


doc= 25363


Sheridan, Charles Francis (1750-1806), author and politician, was born in June 1750 at 12 Dorset Street, Dublin, the second son of Thomas Sheridan (1719?-1788), actor and lecturer on elocution, of Richmond, Yorkshire, and Frances Sheridan (1724-1766), novelist and dramatist, daughter of the Revd Philip Chamberlaine. He was a year older and a much paler literary and political shadow of his better-known brother, the playwright and politician Richard Brinsley Sheridan. Apart from a short period at Mr Whyte's school in Dublin, he was educated by his father, who was anxious that his son should become an orator. 
In 1772 Sheridan was appointed secretary to the British ambassador to Sweden and he made his literary reputation by writing 'A History of the Late Revolution in Sweden' (1778). On his return he entered Lincoln's Inn on 11 May 1775 and he was called to the Irish bar in 1780. At the Irish general election of 1776 Sir Robert Tilson Deane, MP for co. Cork, who wished to obtain a peerage, purchased one of the seats for the borough of Belturbet from Lord Lanesborough for Sheridan. Apart from his connections, the Irish administration probably hoped that they had recruited a good parliamentary speaker, for it was said that: 'in his manner, ardour and earnestness prevail, which render it strikingly pleasing. In argument he is strong, subtle and acute; investigating with precision, what he has studied with diligence; diving to the bottom of his subject, not merely skimming it's surface; he answers objections with ability, but avoids all asperity of recrimination. (Johnston-Liik, parliamentary lists, 1799(1))' However, despite his gifts he kept a low parliamentary profile for the fourteen years that he was in parliament. 
In 1782 Sheridan considered that nothing except 'the most unequivocal assertion of the total independency of the Irish legislature' would satisfy the country (Grattan, 2.215). In 1782 the lord lieutenant, the duke of Portland, dismissed John Lees, formerly private secretary to lords lieutenant Townshend and Harcourt and an efficient Dublin Castle apparatchik, and appointed Sheridan under-secretary in the military department of the chief secretary's office. Sheridan owed his appointment to the influence of his brother Richard with the Rockingham whigs. The office was worth $1000 p.a. and a house. At the general election of 1783 he was returned for the borough of Rathcormack, through government influence with Richard Tonson, who also wished for a peerage and duly became Lord Riversdale. In spring 1783 he married Letitia Christiana, the daughter of Theophilus Bolton, and they had at least five surviving children, including Thomas, Charles, Letitia, and Caroline. 
As was expected of an office-holder, Sheridan voted a solid government line. Nevertheless, Sheridan's situation in one of the key positions in the Irish establishment provided the Portland whigs who went into opposition in 1784 with a valuable ally inside Dublin Castle. As early as 1783 Lord Lieutenant Temple remarked to his brother W. W. Grenville on 'the pleasant private intercourse of the two Sheridans, which you may possibly trace in London as I do here' ('Fortescue MSS', 3.198). Lord Lieutenant Rutland found his literary gifts useful as a pamphleteer in opposition to parliamentary reform and in support of the commercial negotiations and commented that 'he has dealt honourably with the government he serves, and his principles have not been warped by the influence of private connections' ('Rutland MSS', 1.242). The Regency crisis in 1789 broke this discretion and, in accordance with his English connections, he voted for a regency. Lord Lieutenant Buckingham promptly dismissed him but granted his 'very handsome and amiable wife' a pension of $600 ('Fortescue MSS', 3.445). Sheridan declared that 'he was promised a pension of $1,200, $600 of this to his wife' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/326, fols. 67-8), but when and whether this materialized is uncertain. 
Sheridan's political career ended in 1790. He published two pamphlets: 'An Essay on the True Principles of Civil Liberty and Free Government' (1793), which upheld the view of Ireland as an independent kingdom, and 'Some observations on a late address to the citizens of Dublin with thoughts on the present crisis' (1797), in which he attributes the troubled state of the country to the example of France. On the whole, however, he spent his retirement in various unsuccessful experiments, for instance, in trying to design a perpetual motion machine. He was a member of the Royal Dublin Society and of the Royal Irish Academy. He did not enjoy good health and died, aged fifty-six, at Tunbridge Wells on 24 June 1806. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' declared him to be 'a gentleman of most distinguished talents as an author, both in history and political controversy, and no man was more universally beloved and respected in private life' ('GM', 679). 


@@@@@


doc= 25364


Linley, Elizabeth Ann (1754-1792), singer and writer, was born on 5 September (some sources give 4 or 7 September) 1754, probably in her parents' house on Abbey Green, Bath, Somerset, the eldest daughter of the musician Thomas Linley (1733-1795) and his wife, Mary Johnson (1729-1820). She probably sang in Bath concerts from 1763, and sold tickets for concerts from an early age. After a short stint at a boarding-school in Bristol (Bor and Clelland, 26) or Wells (Black, 15), Elizabeth probably made her stage debut with her brother Thomas Linley the younger ['see under 'Linley, Thomas] in Thomas Hull's 'The Fairy Favour' at Covent Garden, London, in 1767. Thomas Linley fully exploited his children's talents: in 1768 Mary Dewes noted that Elizabeth sang in Bath's weekly concerts and that 'she has a sweet voice; but he makes her sing 'too much' and 'too hard' songs, for she is very young' (Delany, 2nd ser., 1.133). Thomas Linley retained tight control over his children's performances in Oxford and London and at the Three Choirs festival: in 1770 he accepted George Colman's contract for a daughter (probably Elizabeth) to sing in the Covent Garden oratorios, but would not let her act there, as he did not 'relish giving the prime of my Daughters performance to support the schemes of others' (Colman, 151). 
In 1773, when Elizabeth was at the height of her fame, Frances Burney commented that her voice was: 'soft, sweet, clear & affecting, she sings with good Expression, & has great Fancy & even taste in her Cadences, though perhaps, a finished singer would give less way to the former, & prefer few & select Notes. She has an exceeding good shake, & the best & most critical Judges pronounce her to be infinitely superiour to 'all' other English singers. ('Early Journals and Letters', 1.249-50)' Burney's sister Susan, however, noted that she was 'without the soul or refinement of a great Italian singer' (Black, 94-5). Elizabeth's voice, enhanced by her beauty, intelligence, and modesty, fostered the cult that surrounded her throughout her life. David Garrick affectionately named her 'the Saint' ('Letters of David Garrick', 3.1163). Joshua Reynolds painted her as Saint Cecilia, as Charity for the window of New College, Oxford, and as the Virgin in the nativity. She was also a frequent subject for Thomas Gainsborough, and Richard Samuel painted her as Terpsichore in 'The Nine Living Muses of Great Britain'. Charles Burney called her a: ''Sancta Caecilia rediviva'... The tone of her voice and expressive manner of singing were as enchanting as her countenance and conversation... she was possessed of the double power of delighting an audience equally in pathetic strains, and songs of brilliant execution, which is allowed to very few singers.' He said that her range extended 'a fourth above the highest note of the harpsichord' (which was 'f'''') (Rees, 5.21). 
This 'saint' had certainly had her trials. In December 1770 the wealthy, elderly Walter Long became engaged to Elizabeth, indemnifying her parents against their loss of her earnings. He resigned his claim in 1771 -- apparently abruptly, shortly before the intended wedding -- avoiding a lawsuit by paying her $3000 and leaving her about $1000 of jewellery and clothing already gifted ('Bath Chronicle', 27 June and 1 Aug 1771). The reason for his actions are uncertain: Elizabeth may have refused to retire from public life, or may have begged him to release her from the match, or he may have been scared off by Samuel Foote's popular play 'The Maid of Bath' (premiered 27 June 1771), which dealt with her relationship difficulties. These difficulties also included an importunate married suitor, 'Captain' (in fact, Ensign) Thomas Mathews, a friend of her father's. Mathews's pursuit became so overbearing that she ran away to France in 1772. She was escorted by the young Richard Brinsley Sheridan (1751-1816), brother to her confidant, Alicia Sheridan (later Alicia Le Fanu). According to Alicia's report, Elizabeth intended to board in a convent, but once in France Sheridan persuaded her that, given appearances, she should marry him (Moore, 50). The 'marriage', putatively in March 1772, went unrecorded, was kept secret, and is unlikely to have been valid. On their return to Bath, Sheridan fought two duels with Mathews, and Elizabeth was kept under strict parental surveillance. When Sheridan's father sent him to Waltham Abbey, forbidding him contact with Elizabeth, and when Sheridan consequently began dalliances with other women, their relationship cooled. 
In 1773 Thomas Linley took his family to London for the oratorio season. Elizabeth took principal parts in the oratorios, and at two performances the 'London Chronicle' reported that 'their Majesties paid great attention both night's to Miss Linley's singing, and seemed much pleased' (11-13 March 1773). Horace Walpole said that the king 'ogles her as much as he dares to do in so holy a place as an oratorio' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 32.106). Frances Burney exclaimed: 'The whole Town seem distracted about her. Every other Diversion is forsaken -- Miss Linley Alone engrosses all Eyes, Ears, Hearts' ('Early Journals and Letters', 1.249). Meanwhile, Elizabeth resigned herself to accept her father's choice of London suitor (who had agreed to leave her fortune with her father). Sheridan's interest was rekindled, however, and he somehow won her and her father round, perhaps partly through promising she could sing again (for Garrick) if the family were in need. Their widely anticipated marriage occurred on 13 April 1773 at St Marylebone. 
Once married, Sheridan ended Elizabeth's public career, explaining to her aggrieved father that 'your daughter's marriage [marked]... quite as natural a period to your rights over her as her death' ('Letters of Richard Brinsley Sheridan', 1.80). The 'Bath Chronicle' of 19 April 1773 estimated that her father had made nearly $10,000 from her voice. Sheridan certainly declined large sums for various appearances -- some say $3200 (Sichel, 1.425), others $2000 per annum for seven years (Watkins, 1.143). On 4 February 1774, however, he advertised a twice-weekly series of exclusive 'private' subscription concerts ('Letters', 1.84). Elizabeth's feelings about her career are unclear: her father apparently had promised her a lighter workload on returning from France, and her constantly delicate state of health must have made the strenuous schedule of concert and oratorio tours all the more daunting. She had joked of fainting during a performance of 'Samson' in Cambridge in June 1772, causing 'no small bustle among the Cantabs' (Rae, 1.195). Sheridan's refusal to let her sing for family and friends on their first Christmas cannot have pleased her, however. After the initial failure of his play 'The Rivals' (1775), she wrote to him: 'My dear Dick, I am delighted. I always knew that it was impossible you could make anything by writing plays; so now there is nothing for it but my beginning to sing publickly again, and we shall have as much money as we like. (Sichel, 1.500-01)' Amid family concerns and poor health -- she had one son, Thomas (Tom) Sheridan, and several miscarriages -- Elizabeth devoted herself to furthering Sheridan's career. When Sheridan, Thomas Linley, and Dr Ford bought Garrick's share in Drury Lane Theatre in 1776, Elizabeth kept accounts, auditioned singers, and read and advised Sheridan on play manuscripts. Michael Kelly stated that she adapted 'Richard Coeur de Lion' for the English stage -- this was presumably the version of which the libretto is usually credited to John Burgoyne -- and wrote English words to a Gluck song that he performed. Sheridan's letters regarding 'The Duenna' (1775) demonstrate Elizabeth's hand in the music, and according to Watkins she composed for Sheridan's 'Robinson Crusoe'. When Sheridan and Thomas Harris took over management of the King's Theatre opera house in 1778, Elizabeth was apparently also engaged in selecting music for that venture. Elizabeth had a bent for verse (much of her output -- particularly her courtship and elegiac poetry -- became public), and Sheridan said of their early married life that 'Mrs. Sheridan and myself were often obliged to keep writing for our daily leg or shoulder of mutton' (Watkins, 1.144). While the couple's courtship furnished the material for Sheridan's plays, Elizabeth may also have had an active role in their creation. In 1775 her sister Mary Linley ['see under 'Linley, Thomas] speculated that Elizabeth had written the 'much admired' epilogue to 'The Rivals' (Moore, 101), and Watkins said that 'The School for Scandal' was 'by some... attributed to the pen of Mrs. Sheridan' (Watkins, 1.159). 
As Sheridan turned from the theatre to politics, winning the seat of Stafford with Edward Monckton in 1780, his wife assisted him, and became one of the leading politically active whig women. In 1784 and 1790 she electioneered for Charles James Fox, her 'passionate admirer' (Sichel, 1.186); in 1789, during the Regency crisis, she wrote out the letter from George, prince of Wales, to the ministry, accepting the Regency, and jokingly said to her friend Mehetabel Canning that 'I intend when he is Regent to claim something good for myself for 'Secret Service'' (Gillaspie, 201). Elizabeth continued her own writing; in December 1782 she told Alicia Sheridan, 'I have begun my book and you cannot think what a respectable figure it cuts already' (Sichel, 2.392). William Linley apparently told Thomas Moore that she had written 'an entertainment called the 'Haunted Village', which she gave Sheridan to add some touches to', but which he never returned, suppressing it (so Linley thought) out of jealousy (Bor and Clelland, 109). 
Although in 1779 Frances Burney noted that Sheridan 'evidently adores her, -- and she as evidently idolizes him' ('Early Journals and Letters', 3.230), their marriage did not continue happily. Burney also noted that 'Mrs. Sheridan's Beauty is unequaled by any I 'ever' saw except Mrs. Crewes' (ibid., 3.226), and indeed Sheridan's first notable affair, beginning as early as 1775, was with Frances Anne Crewe, a prominent whig hostess. Over his later liaison with Harriet Ponsonby ('nee' Cavendish), Lady Duncannon, Elizabeth wrote to Canning proposing 'an amiable separation', as 'we have been sometime separated 'in fact' as Man and Wife... the duplicity of his Conduct to me, has hurt me more than any thing else, and I confess to you that my Heart is entirely Alienated from him' (Gillaspie, 324). 
Elizabeth suffered depression not only from Sheridan's alienation, but also from the death of several of her siblings, particularly her beloved sister Mary in 1787. Caring for Mary's children distracted her, and the eldest, her namesake, was made her ward: 'the Legacy of her ever Dear and lamented Mother... constitutes all my Happiness', she wrote ('A Nest of Nightingales', 80). Distraction also came in the form of a dalliance with the infatuated duke of Clarence (later William IV). She claimed to Canning that: 'tho' I own to you I am not indifferent to his devoted Attachment for Me, and have thought more favourably of him still, since I have had reason to make Comparisons between his Conduct and S -- '... you may rely on the propriety of my Conduct in regard to him for many sakes -- but I will in future live by myself, and to my own Tastes. (Gillaspie, 324)' By the end of 1790 Elizabeth had all but separated from Sheridan. Only pressure from her friends, including Fox, had prevented her from making the break obvious, and she continued to accompany Sheridan at Foxite whig social events. About that time she began a sexual relationship with Lord Edward Fitzgerald (1763-1798), then a Foxite nobleman with leanings towards the radicalism of Thomas Paine. In Fitzgerald's words, 'She managed me' (Tillyard, 124). She became pregnant with his child in summer 1791, but was soon obviously ill with tuberculosis, and the pregnancy probably hastened her own death. Her daughter, Mary, was born on 30 March 1792. Elizabeth died at Bristol Hotwells in Clifton, Gloucestershire, on 28 June 1792. Her dying wish was that Sheridan should recognize Mary as his own child, but that Canning should have charge of her. Elizabeth's independence of mind extended to religious matters: she told Canning, 'there is nobody has more true Religion 'at Heart' than I have, tho' I profess to think less seriously of forms and Ceremonies than some do' (Gillaspie, 190). None the less, she was buried on 7 July in Wells Cathedral next to her sister, in front of a great crowd of onlookers. 


@@@@@


doc= 25365


Sheridan, Frances (1724-1766), novelist and playwright, was born in Dublin, the daughter of the Revd Dr Philip Chamberlaine, prebendary of Rathmichael, archdeacon of Glendalough, and rector of St Nicholas Without, and his wife, Anastasia Whyte. Frances was the youngest of five children, three of whom were boys; her mother died shortly after her birth. Her father considering female literacy 'perfectly superfluous', Frances Chamberlaine was secretly taught to write by her clergyman brother Walter. At the age of fifteen, she wrote a romance, 'Eugenia and Adelaide', published posthumously in 1791, and two sermons which her granddaughter recorded 'were reckoned to display considerable ability' (A. Le Fanu, 9). 
During the so-called 'Cato' affair (a theatrical quarrel sparked off by the misappropriation of a costume) in Dublin in 1743, Frances Chamberlaine espoused the side of Thomas Sheridan (1719?-1788), of the Smock Alley Theatre, penning in his defence some verses entitled 'The Owls: a Fable'. She subsequently married the actor and theatre manager, probably in 1747. The couple had six children: Thomas (who died aged three), Charles Francis Sheridan, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Alicia, later Alicia Le Fanu (1753-1817) ['see under 'Le Fanu, Philip (1735-1795)], Sackville (who died in infancy), and Anne Elizabeth. 
As a consequence of financial misfortunes, the Sheridans moved to London in 1754. There, Frances Sheridan met Samuel Richardson who read her unpublished romance and encouraged her to write another. The result was her finest work, the sentimental novel 'Memoirs of Miss Sidney Bidulph', published anonymously, but with a dedication to Richardson, in 1761. A study of the effect of extreme distress on apparently irreproachable virtue, the novel embodies a feminist critique of poetical justice so remorseless as to lead Samuel Johnson, one of many influential admirers, to exclaim, 'I know not, Madam, that you have a right, upon moral principles, to make your readers suffer so much' (Boswell, 'Life', 276). As one whose own writing was influenced by contemporary French fiction, Sheridan received the compliment of finding 'Sidney Bidulph' translated into French by the Abbe Prevost as 'Memoires pour servir a l'histoire de la vertu' in 1761; a German translation appeared the following year. 
Sheridan next turned from fiction to the theatre, writing a comedy, 'The Discovery' (1763), which pleased David Garrick, who staged it at Drury Lane on 3 February 1763, playing the role of Sir Anthony Branville himself with Thomas Sheridan taking the part of Lord Medway. The young John O'Keeffe declared that the comedy 'gave great delight, and the success was perfect' (O'Keeffe, 1.86). It played to full houses for seventeen nights; subsequent revivals included an adaptation by Aldous Huxley in 1924. On 10 December of the same year, a second comedy, 'The Dupe' (published 1764), was produced at Drury Lane by George Colman before being withdrawn after three nights, allegedly because 'of the theatrical cabals of a popular actress [Kitty Clive]' (A. Le Fanu, 235-6). 
In general Frances Sheridan was much admired by male and female friends alike: from Samuel Johnson, Edward Young, and James Boswell -- who considered her 'sensible, ingenious, unassuming, yet communicative' (Boswell, 'Life', 275) -- to Sarah Fielding, Catherine Macauley, and Sarah Scott. The Sheridans' continuing financial difficulties constrained them in September 1764 to move to France, where they eventually settled at Blois. There Sheridan wrote the 'Conclusion of the Memoirs of Miss Sidney Bidulph', relating the misfortunes of her heroine's daughters (1767). An unfinished comedy, 'A Journey to Bath', was rejected by Garrick, and eventually published only in 1890. A completion by Elizabeth Kuti was successfully staged in Ireland and Edinburgh in 1999. The play is notable for providing in Mrs Tryfort the prototype of Mrs Malaprop in 'The Rivals' by Frances's son Richard Brinsley Sheridan. 
Frances Sheridan's final (and posthumously published) work, 'The History of Nourjahad' (1767), confirmed her talents as a writer of fiction; another account of virtue under stress and long regarded as the finest oriental tale in English after Johnson's 'Rasselas', the work went through many editions and translation into French, Russian, and Polish and was dramatized by Sophia Lee (1788), among others. Frances Sheridan died at Blois after a short illness on 26 September 1766. She was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 25366


Hay, Helen Selina, countess of Gifford (1807-1867), author and song writer, was the eldest daughter of Thomas Sheridan (1775-1817), colonial administrator (younger son of Richard Brinsley Sheridan), and his wife, Caroline Henrietta Callander (1779-1851), novelist ['see 'Sheridan, Caroline Henrietta]. She was taken by her parents in 1813 to the Cape of Good Hope, whence, after her father's death on 12 September 1817, she returned to England, where she grew up in an apartment in Hampton Court Palace. At seventeen she became engaged to Commander Price Blackwood (1794-1841), the youngest of three sons of Hans, Lord Dufferin, and Mehetabel Temple; owing to the deaths of his brothers, he was heir to the title and estate in Ireland of Baron Dufferin and Claneboye. His parents opposed the marriage, on financial grounds. Hence, after their wedding at St George's, Hanover Square, London, on 4 July 1825, the young couple went to Italy. They lived in Florence, where their only child, Frederick Temple Hamilton-Temple Blackwood, subsequently marquess of Dufferin and Ava, was born on 21 June 1826. 
After two years they returned to England, and lived in a cottage at Thames Ditton. When visiting her sisters, Mrs Caroline Norton and Lady Seymour, in London, Helen Blackwood was introduced to the world of wit and fashion in which they moved, and there she made the acquaintance of the Misses Berry, Samuel Rogers, Henry Taylor, Brougham, Lockhart, Sydney Smith, and Benjamin Disraeli. Her husband succeeded his father as Baron Dufferin and Claneboye in the peerage of Ireland in November 1839, and he died on 21 July 1841, on board the 'Reindeer', off Belfast, aged forty-seven, from an overdose of morphia, taken inadvertently. 
Lady Dufferin dedicated herself to her son, with whom she enjoyed a particularly close relationship. A trip up the Nile in his company led to the publication, in 1863, of 'Lispings from Low Latitudes, or, Extracts from the Journal of the Hon. Impulsia Gushington', in which she made fun of the genre of travel writing. She also wrote a play called 'Finesse, or, A Busy Day in Messina', which was first performed at the Haymarket Theatre in 1863. The acting of John Baldwin Buckstone and Alfred Wigan contributed to a highly successful run. She neither acknowledged the authorship, nor attended any performance. Her songs and verses were published anonymously, the first dating from her girlhood. Her earliest publication was a collection of songs written with her sister Caroline, for which they were paid $100. She also published several volumes of songs and ballads, the most successful of which were 'The Irish Emigrant' (1845) and 'Terence's Farewell' (1840). 
George Hay, earl of Gifford (1822-1862) and son and heir of the marquess of Tweeddale, had been a friend and suitor for some fifteen years when in 1862 he was seriously injured by holding back a stone which was falling on some of his workmen. They were married on 13 October 1862, at Dufferin Lodge, in London, and he died there on 22 December. Lady Dufferin explained her motives to Gifford's father: '[It] gives me the right to devote every hour and every day God spares him to his comfort and relief, and... the right to mourn him openly' (Dufferin, memoir). She died five years later from breast cancer, on 13 June 1867 at Dufferin Lodge, and was buried with her second husband at Friern Barnet, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 25367


Sheridan, Richard Brinsley (1751-1816), playwright and politician, was born in September or October 1751 at 12 Dorset Street, Dublin, the third child of Thomas Sheridan (1719?-1788), actor and orthoepist, and his wife, Frances Sheridan, nee Chamberlaine (1724-1766), novelist and playwright. He was baptized at St Mary's Church on 4 November, the register listing him as 'Thos. Brinsley', Thomas also being the Christian name of his grandfather Dr Thomas Sheridan (1687-1738). His parents, however, called him Richard. Their eldest child, Thomas, died in 1750, the year when their second son, Charles Francis (died 1806), was born. 
When his parents went to London in 1754, after a riot in the Smock Alley Theatre (then managed by Thomas Sheridan), Richard and his elder sister Alicia, later Alicia Le Fanu (1753-1817) ['see under 'Le Fanu, Philip], stayed in Dublin, looked after by a nurse. The parents were back in Dublin from 1756 to 1758 and Thomas then began his son's education, but when they left for London again Richard and his sister lived with Samuel Whyte, attending his famous school in Grafton Street. Richard had two years with his family when he and Alicia joined them in Windsor in 1759; he never returned to Ireland. 
In 1759 Frances Sheridan taught both her sons, concentrating largely on English. In 1762 Richard was sent to Harrow School where he remained until 1767 or 1768, his parents having decided 'to accustom him early to shift for himself'. Though befriended by a member of the staff, Dr Samuel Parr, he was lonely, missing his parents, who had moved to France to escape creditors. His mother died there when he was fourteen; he was not reunited with the family in London until he was seventeen. 
In London, Lewis Ker, a former physician, tutored Sheridan in Latin and mathematics, Domenick Angelo teaching him fencing and horsemanship. Angelo's son became his friend: both boys were also educated by Richard's father, who moved the family to Bath in 1770, teaching elocution and giving his Attic entertainments there. 
Richard enjoyed the social life of Bath. He corresponded with Nathaniel Brassey Halhed, a friend at Harrow, now at Oxford; they wrote a farce, 'Ixion', later called 'Jupiter', offered in vain to Garrick and Foote. Their verse translation of the 'Love Epistles' of Aristaenetus, published in 1771, was reissued in 1773. They planned a literary periodical to be called 'Hernan's Miscellany', of which Sheridan wrote a draft first issue. Two of Sheridan's poems were published in the 'Bath Chronicle', 'The Ridotto of Bath', a skit, and 'Cleo's Protest, or, The Picture Varnished', addressed to a Bath beauty; both poems were reprinted in pamphlet form. 
Halhed's letters praised Elizabeth Ann (Eliza)Linley (1754-1792), who had sung superbly in oratorios at Oxford. Strikingly beautiful, with a magnificent soprano voice, she was painted at least four times by Gainsborough, and Reynolds described one of his two paintings of her as St Cecilia as the best he had ever painted. She was the daughter of Thomas Linley, a musician whom Thomas Sheridan first met in 1764 and had hired to take part in his Attic entertainments. By 1771 Eliza had become engaged to Walter Long, a Wiltshire squire many years her senior who gave her father $3000 for breach of promise when she told him she could never be happy as his wife. Ensuing gossip prompted Samuel Foote's satiric play 'The Maid of Bath'. Pursued by a Captain Mathews, a married man, she confided her anxieties about this situation to Sheridan's sisters. Sheridan's brother Charles was in love with her but withdrew from Bath for fear of displeasing his father, then acting in Dublin, who thought the Linleys socially inferior. 
Eliza decided to withdraw from public life as a singer and retire to a convent in France. Richard offered to conduct her there, and, borrowing money, organized their journey to Lille, proposing to her 'en route'. They were married by a Roman Catholic priest at a village near Calais but did not consummate the marriage, Eliza taking a place in a convent in Lille; her father, having followed them, insisted she should return to Bath and fulfil some singing engagements. Mathews had attacked Sheridan as 'a L[iar] and a treacherous S[coundrel]' in a letter in the 'Bath Chronicle' but when Sheridan, who had returned from France with the Linleys, called on him in London he tried to blame Richard's brother Charles. Back in Bath, Sheridan read the letter, dashed to London, defeated Mathews in a duel and compelled him to retract and apologize in the 'Bath Chronicle'. A second duel was fought on 2 July, Mathews having lied about the details of his defeat in the first one; this time Sheridan was seriously wounded. 
Both fathers strongly objected to Richard and Eliza marrying, Linley not wanting Eliza to give up her very successful musical career and thinking Sheridan's extravagance likely to ruin her, Thomas Sheridan sending Richard to friends, Mr and Mrs Parker, at Waltham Abbey in Essex to study law before entering the Middle Temple, hoping to keep him out of further quarrels with Mathews and from seeing Eliza. At first Richard kept his promise not to communicate with her, and studied a wide range of subjects, aiming to fit himself for public life. She wrote to him, however, and he managed to meet her secretly; the upshot was that they were married on 13 April 1773, Thomas Linley, apparently acquiescent, attending the service. But Thomas Sheridan now considered he had no son but Charles -- whom he had always favoured. 
After a blissful time at East Burnham, the young couple bought a London house, in Orchard Street, using some of Eliza's $1000 dowry, taken out of the $3000 paid to her father by Walter Long. After fulfilling her two engagements Eliza never sang professionally again: Sheridan thought it unbecoming for a gentleman's wife to sing for money and she disliked performing in public. But what were they to live on? 
Sheridan, who had given up his studies at the Middle Temple, thought writing the answer, informing his father-in-law in November 1774 that there would be a comedy of his in rehearsal at Covent Garden within a few days. 'The Rivals' was withdrawn after the first night, 17 January 1775, but Sheridan rewrote it in ten days and its popularity has lasted ever since. Set in Bath, it owes not a little to his mother's novel 'Memoirs of Miss Sidney Biddulph' (1761; 1767) and her unfinished play 'A Journey to Bath', in which her Mrs Tryfort anticipated her son's Mrs Malaprop. The play possesses the originality of true comedy, though it contains many deliberate echoes of other plays. There are many references to and caricaturings of events in Sheridan's own life, Sir Anthony Absolute, mirroring Congreve's Sir Sampson Legend in 'Love for Love', being a father as domineering and opinionated as Sheridan's own. Sir Lucius O'Trigger, toned down in the rewritten version of the play, became more than the blustering stage Irishman, originally acted by John Lee, being now better portrayed by Laurence Clinch, for whose benefit performance Sheridan wrote, reputedly in two days, 'St Patrick's Day', an amusing farce reflecting not only his interest in the American War of Independence but pride in his Irish ancestry. He liked to give the impression of dashing off his writing, Thomas Moore alleging in his discussion of 'The School for Scandal' that Sheridan's policy was to gain credit for excessive indolence and carelessness, while few people of such brilliant talent 'ever used more art and circumspection' (Moore, 1.241, 192, 209). 

'The Duenna', a highly successful comic opera, with songs and music provided by the Linley family, which ran for seventy-four nights, opened on 2 November 1774 -- four days after the birth of a son, Thomas. Two daughters elope, outwitting tyrannical fathers; a duenna outsmarts her master by marrying the rich suitor chosen for his daughter: here is the intricate plotting of classic comedy, with appearances exposed by reality. 
Sheridan was already negotiating to buy David Garrick's controlling share of the Drury Lane Theatre for $35,000. His father-in-law and Dr James Ford, a fashionable 'man-midwife', joined him in the complicated financing, Sheridan's $10,000 share obtained largely by borrowing $7700 and raising $1000 by mortgages. The other share, owned by Willoughby Lacy, was sold to Sheridan in 1778 for 30,000 guineas and an annuity of $1000 per year. On 21 September 1776 Drury Lane opened under Sheridan's management. He staged three revised versions of Congreve's comedies and rewrote Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse' as 'A Trip to Scarborough' (staged on 24 February 1777), giving it 'a little wholesome pruning' (R. B. Sheridan, 'A Trip to Scarborough', II.i). Such Restoration comedies might have seemed too coarse for current taste, but Sheridan was preparing for his own highly successful 'The School for Scandal', with its contrast between the Surface brothers, its exposure of the moralizing Joseph's hypocrisy and the generosity of Charles the 'wild spark'. While mocking excessive sensibility, the play, first staged on 8 May 1777, drew genuine feeling in Lady Teazle's transformation, and reflected current political issues in its reference to the 'Annuity Act', which necessitated Sheridan's persuading the lord chamberlain that the money-lending scene was general satire, not an attack on Benjamin Hopkins, a respectable rival of the raffish politician John Wilkes for a public office. 

'The Camp', satirizing military manners and current events, staged on 30 October 1779, ran for fifty-seven performances. Sheridan followed it with 'The Critic', exposing dramatic conventions and cliches, in effect teasing the audience into thinking about the issues involved while mocking contemporary journalism and well-known individuals. 
The Sheridans' social life expanded rapidly; they had given private concerts, and, as Fanny Burney's diary records in April 1773, 'the whole town seems distracted about her. Every other diversion is forsaken. Miss Linley alone engrosses all eyes, ears, hearts' ('The Early Diary of Frances Burney', ed. A. Raine Ellis, 1907, 1.210). The youthful playwright and manager of Drury Lane conversed wittily and had a charm of manner complementing his wife's attractiveness. They were accepted in aristocratic circles, welcome guests at Devonshire House and Chatsworth, at Holland House, Burlington House, and Carlton House. 
Sheridan particularly admired Charles James Fox for desiring political reform and opposing the American war. They became friends, Fox thinking Sheridan the wittiest of men. Proposed by Dr Johnson in 1777, Sheridan became a member of the Literary Club, where he met Edmund Burke. The next year he was elected to Brooks's Club. 
Sheridan was now living beyond his means, many of his new friends and acquaintances setting him examples of extravagance supported by vast debts. Gaming and drinking were part of their social life, which condoned sexual irregularity. Sheridan, though happy to make wagers, did not gamble. Optimistic about his ability to repay debts, he spent freely, frequently moving residences and entertaining lavishly. 
Sheridan had always wanted a public career. He began it by drawing up a manifesto for the Westminster committee's campaign to promote electoral reform. The next step was to obtain a seat in parliament, but depending on a patron or buying a borough were not possible methods for him; besides, he was determined to be independent; he was elected in Stafford in 1780. Though aided by the duchess of Devonshire and her mother, Lady Spencer, his election depended on the votes of the burgesses, an expensive business, costing him over $1000, probably largely borrowed against his share in Drury Lane. Sheridan envisaged achieving distinction and fortune as an MP and prepared his early speeches carefully, gradually consolidating a reputation for eloquence and wit. He supported the whig opposition, concerning himself frequently with the encroachment of the state on public liberties. When the Rockingham administration came to power in March 1782 it had a liberal, reformist policy, Fox becoming secretary of state for the northern department (foreign affairs) and Sheridan under-secretary. 
In May 1782 this Westminster government repealed the 'Declaratory Act' (6 Geo. I c. 5; which asserted the right of the king and Westminster parliament to make laws binding the kingdom of Ireland), Poynings' law, and the 'Mutiny Act', Henry Grattan having carried a motion for legislative independence in the Dublin parliament in accord with the resolutions of the Irish Volunteers, about which Sheridan had been informed by his brother Charles, now an MP in the Irish parliament. Sheridan, however, thought that Shelburne, secretary of state for the southern department (which included Irish affairs) was conceding Irish legislative independence rather than regarding it as a right. After Rockingham's death in June 1782, Shelburne was asked by the king to replace him, and Fox, at odds with Shelburne, withdrew from the government, Sheridan and Burke following him. When Shelburne lost office in February 1783 Fox, despite Sheridan's powerful pleas against this, allied himself with Lord North. Sheridan was appointed by them as joint secretary to the Treasury with Burke's son Richard. 
Burke, influenced against Warren Hastings, then governor general of Bengal, by Sir Philip Francis, persuaded Fox to introduce bills for governmental supervision of the East India Company. Sheridan supported these bills which were passed in the Commons but rejected in the Lords, largely through the influence of the king, who then dismissed the Fox-North administration, requesting Pitt to form a government. 
By 1782 Sheridan was concentrating on politics, leaving the management of Drury Lane largely to his father-in-law, ably aided by Eliza, for over six years. His antipathy to excessive monarchical authority, his increasing dislike of Pitt for representing it -- and for having taunted him, in February 1783, for being a dramatist and theatre proprietor, something rebutted by Sheridan's dubbing Pitt, in a phrase from Ben Jonson's 'The Alchemist', the 'Angry Boy' -- and his own sympathy for an India under the East India Company's autocratic rule led him, despite the break between himself and Nathaniel Halhed, one of Hastings's lieutenants in India, to attack Hastings after he resigned and returned from India in 1784. 
Sheridan, having cross-examined the resident of Lucknow skilfully beforehand in the debate on 7 February 1787, supported the impeachment of Hastings for robbing the begums of Oudh of their treasure and allowing the seizure of their lands. In this five-and-a-half-hour speech, Sheridan showed a masterly ability to handle minute legal detail as well as making general statements which appealed to the sensibility of his audience, the motion being passed by 175 votes to 68. His oratorical powers were further demonstrated at Hastings's trial, begun on 3 June 1789, in a carefully prepared speech lasting over several days and ending with the famous phrase, uttered as he swooned dramatically into Burke's arms, 'My Lords, I have done'. 
Sheridan became more directly embroiled with Pitt in February 1785 when Pitt's Irish resolutions for a commercial union, put to the Irish parliament, seemed a denial of Irish independence. He opposed Pitt's plans rigorously in a speech of 20 May which marked his increasing political interest in Irish affairs. 
Further differences arose through Sheridan's friendship with the prince of Wales who, opposed to his father in most matters, sympathized with the aims of Fox's party, hoping the Foxites would grant him a handsome income if they came to power. Sheridan, now a 'habitue' of Carlton House, grew closer to the prince after his secret marriage in December 1785 to Mrs Fitzherbert, a Roman Catholic, an action illegal under the 'Act of Settlement' and the 'Royal Marriages Act', glossing over the situation skilfully in the house. His influence increased when the king, suffering from porphyria in October 1788, was thought to have become mad. In the ensuing political crisis -- the prince would become regent if the king were declared insane, king if his father died -- Sheridan acted as a link between the prince and the politicians, Fox being in Italy. He gave the prince subtle independent advice, drafted his diplomatic reply to Pitt's offer of a conditional regency, and manipulated the press in the manner of some contemporary prime minister's spokesman. The whig leaders Fox and Lord Grey, jealous of Sheridan's position, wasted energy intriguing about the potential allocation of ministries. The prince understood Sheridan's proud nature, his concept of honour, his Anglo-Irish insistence on the importance of being a gentleman, accentuated by awareness of his descent from the O'Sioradain chiefs of co. Cavan, his conscientious scruples, his willingness to grant but not receive favours for himself. 
Thomas Sheridan, acting Cato in Covent Garden, had deeply upset Richard by refusing to see him, although he did attend a performance of 'The Rivals' with his daughters in 1775. They were reconciled later but he was offended by the terms Richard offered him in 1776 to manage Drury Lane. One condition was that he stop acting, Richard not wanting to be known as a player's son. Thomas nevertheless accepted the position in 1778 and resigned in 1780 in the expectation of being reappointed. When he was not he refused to speak to his son until his last illness when Richard sat by his bedside for his last four days at Margate, where he died on 14 August 1788. 
Sheridan's relationships with other women drove Eliza to contemplate separating from him. The romantic marriage had become a mere formality. Sheridan, smitten by his 'Amoret', a whig hostess, Frances Anne Crewe, then married for two years to John Crewe, had sent her 'A portrait' as the dedication of 'The School for Scandal', probably the last copy he revised. His wife seems to have tolerated this affair, which lasted until the middle or late seventeen-eighties, she and Mrs Crewe remaining on friendly terms. But Sheridan's passionate relationship with the duchess of Devonshire's sister Lady Harriet Duncannon (Lady Bessborough after 1793 when her husband Viscount Duncannon succeeded to the earldom) deeply wounded Eliza. In 1789 Harriet's husband decided to divorce her and sue Sheridan but was persuaded out of this by the duke of Devonshire. While Fox was urging Eliza to forgive Sheridan, the prince of Wales was attempting to persuade his brother the duke of Clarence, hopelessly in love with her, not to pester Eliza with his attentions. An absurd situation ensued at Crewe House where Sheridan, pleading for his wife's forgiveness, was discovered locked in a bedchamber with the governess. Eliza was furious but finally agreed to take Sheridan back. 
In 1791 Eliza and Lord Edward Fitzgerald became lovers. He was the father of her daughter Mary, born in spring 1792. With her pregnancy Eliza's tendency to tuberculosis returned and she died on 28 June, Sheridan, grief-stricken and guilty, attending her to the last. The daughter was treated as a Sheridan, Sheridan and Fitzgerald remaining on friendly terms, both seeing Eliza reborn in Mary, who died in October 1793. The lives of the two men were further entangled when Madame de Genlis and Pamela (reputedly the daughter of the duc d'Orleans, actually Nancy Sims, an English orphan) came to England. They were Sheridan's guests at Isleworth. Both he and Fitzgerald thought Pamela the image of Eliza, and Sheridan seems to have proposed to her but characteristically did not ensure his letters reached her. After Madame de Genlis and Pamela had returned to France, Fitzgerald married Pamela at Tournai and they moved to Ireland where Fitzgerald became active in the United Irishmen. 
Sheridan had been involved in the rebuilding of the Drury Lane Theatre from 1791 to 1794; he intended to finance it by $150,000 of debentures but the cost, which overran the estimates, and the need to purchase a third dormant patent meant $90,000 more had to be found. He became involved in a morass of mortgages, the trustees increasingly impatient with his failure to meet financial liabilities. The strains involved made him aware of his loneliness at forty-three. On 27 April 1795 he married again. His second wife was Hester Jane Ogle (whom he called Hecca), the lively nineteen-year-old daughter of the dean of Winchester. Her father insisted on a trust being established for her, made up of her $5000 dowry and Sheridan's $15,000. 
They had a son, Charles, born on 14 January 1796, and bought Polesden Lacey, a manor house with 340 acres, in Surrey, Sheridan raising the money by selling 3000 renters' shares in the theatre. He proved a generous landlord to his tenants. Careless rather than grossly extravagant, he would leave letters unopened, plays unread, and bills, often for more than was owed, unpaid -- though they 'did' get paid, he told Hecca in reply to her complaints of neglect and indifference to her well-being, which he blamed on his sanguine temper, that his confidence could meet any difficulties. There were many: his chaotic financial arrangements led to borrowing from his associates in the theatre, John Grubb and Thomas Shaw in particular, and urgent letters to Richard Peake, the under-treasurer of Drury Lane, frequently requested small advances, sometimes against his subsistence money of 5 guineas a day (his annual salary in 1807 was $2000). Peake also received many letters covering the administrative expenses of the theatre as well as the salaries of actors and actresses, often in arrears. Letters to Hecca, generally energetic accounts of buoyant activity, convey his regard for her -- he can assure her he loves her 'more and more dearly if possible every hour' (letter of 6(?) Oct 1796 from the House of Commons, 'Letters of Richard Brinsley Sheridan', 2.53) -- as well as expressing concern for his children and telling her of his own occasional fits of low spirits and melancholia. 
Sheridan, like Fox a supporter of the French Revolution after the fall of the Bastille, argued strongly against the execution of Louis XVI. James Gillray's satirical etching 'The hopes of the party prior to July 14th -- from such Crown and Anchor-dreams, good Lord deliver us' refers to the radicals' annual celebration of the taking of the Bastille in 1791 -- which neither Sheridan nor Fox attended. In it Gillray shows Fox about to chop off King George's head, who is uttering 'What! What! What! What's the matter now' while Sheridan holds him down by the ears. Fox deferred to the views of Burke, then writing his 'Reflections on the Revolution in France'. Burke attacked the innovations and abuses of the revolution in a speech of February 1790, accusing some of the whigs of forming cabals to alter the British constitution, an allegation Fox denied, while Sheridan, on whom Burke was casting suspicion, taunted Burke in return, comparing the revolution to the English one of 1688, saying what Burke deplored in France was the result of despotism. This provoked Burke's memorable reply that he and Sheridan were now separated in politics. 
Sheridan now sought to ally the whigs' desire for political reform with popular radicalism. With several whig leaders he joined the committee of the Society of Friends of the People which opposed Burke's ideas. It made contact with the Society of United Irishmen, founded in 1791 to unite all religions in Ireland, to make it an independent and democratic country, an aim with which Sheridan strongly sympathized. 
After Pitt declared war on France, on 12 February 1793, Sheridan's personal position became hazardous when the increasingly reactionary government instituted a series of prosecutions for treason. But he did not cease to be independent, strongly supporting Thomas Walker, president of the Manchester Constitutional Society, when he was tried -- and acquitted. After visiting them in prison, he complained strongly about the treatment of the Scottish radicals Thomas Muir and the Revd Thomas Palmer. And he was in contact with the very radical London Corresponding Society. 
After the arrests in April 1794 of the Revd William Jackson in Dublin (he had been sent from Paris to test likely support in England for a French invasion) and of William Stone in London (probably also involved in espionage) in May, Sheridan, who had been visited by Stone, was questioned by the secretary of state's office on 8 May and by the privy council the next day. Pitt was obviously hoping to incriminate him, but Sheridan must have regarded Stone as an 'agent provocateur' in this period of increasing repression, with the government using informers and spies, and opening letters. Sheridan called it 'a system calculated to engender suspicion and to beget hostility... where it does not find suspicion it creates it'. Stone was acquitted, but Jackson, found guilty of high treason, committed suicide. Sheridan's self-confidence was not shaken, and in January 1795 he proposed, unsuccessfully, the repeal of the suspension of the 'Habeas Corpus Act'. In the trial of Horne Tooke, he humiliated Pitt by forcing him to admit his earlier evidence was wrong, thus gaining Tooke's acquittal. To associate with and defend the democratic radicals of the London Corresponding Society was brave. Sheridan's courage was acknowledged by the society in a large public meeting of 25 June 1795 which, in a vote of thanks, praised 'Citizen Sheridan', who had made his final brilliant speech against Hastings four months earlier. Hastings, however, was acquitted. The political climate had changed, but Sheridan's fight had not. He was at once encouraging popular radicalism and supporting the prince of Wales, whose massive debts of $630,000 Pitt agreed to pay -- a proceeding to which Sheridan agreed, but not, he argued, as something to be met out of public funds, but, rather, by abolishing sinecures and selling royal forests and crown lands. 
Tension in Ireland, increased by the sacking in 1795 of Earl Fitzwilliam, the liberal viceroy who had vainly encouraged Grattan to introduce a bill for Catholic emancipation, was added to by General Lake's repressive measures. The United Irishmen began to plan their revolution, seeking French aid, Lord Edward Fitzgerald and Arthur O'Connor acting as emissaries. A large French fleet sailed into Bantry Bay in 1796 with over 14,000 troops aboard, but bad weather meant the postponement of French plans for an invasion. Naval mutinies in England moved Sheridan to propose a committee to look into the sailors' grievances. After the mutiny -- apparently defused by some of the sailors' demands being met -- had spread he withdrew his proposal, not wanting any French invasion of England. The movement for reform was now in abeyance, Fox and Grey having virtually seceded from parliament after Grey's motion for reform failed to be carried. Sheridan, however, now became more deeply involved in Irish affairs. Arthur O'Connor, back in England in February 1798 'en route' to seek further French aid for an Irish revolution, was arrested with four others at Margate. At their trial in Maidstone, Sheridan, Fox, and Whitbread gave evidence; the trial ended with only one defendant found guilty. Sheridan said he would never permit Ireland to be seized as a post from which England could be attacked, a view he repeated later. In the riot that followed O'Connor's attempt to escape (possibly organized by Sheridan), Sheridan asked the judges why O'Connor, acquitted, was still being held, and was praised by them for his restoration of order in the courtroom. It was an action which made it unlikely he would himself be prosecuted later. 
The rising of the United Irishmen virtually coincided with this trial and Sheridan defended the rebels in the House of Commons, arguing that the struggle in Ireland was between people and government and that a fair presumption was that the government was to blame. He called for an end to the repressive methods used to crush the rising, but after it was over his hopes for a non-sectarian independent Ireland were over too. He continued none the less to state his political beliefs openly, and did so most effectively through the symbolism of 'Pizarro', his adaptation of several translations of August von Kotzebue's 'Die Spanien in Peru', staged on 24 May 1799. Kotzebue was regarded as subversive, but Sheridan, while echoing his own speeches in the Hastings trial, managed to make this play patriotic. In effect, it opposed a French invasion yet supported the United Irishmen with a new definition of treason, not warring against one's native land but against 'those who have usurped its power'. The play was immensely successful, running for thirty-one nights. Acting in it were John Philip Kemble and his sister Sarah Siddons, whose acting had so benefited the theatre at a time when all Sheridan's persuasive charm was needed to offset frequent failures to pay the players' salaries. His own high spirits inspired practical joking in which he was joined by his friends Joseph Richardson and Richard Tickell, husband of Eliza's sister Mary. 
Sheridan next battled against the 'Act of Union', speaking against it five times in 1799. He also pressed for peace with France, something achieved in 1802. This year he defeated a bill brought against him in the chancery court by his creditors. Two years later he was appalled by Napoleon's remorseless progress towards creating an empire. Now liberty seemed the concern of the English alone, and Sheridan, by 1803, became a strong supporter of the volunteer corps. 
When his son Tom was offered a place in the household of the duke of York in 1803 Sheridan refused this offer which had been prompted by the king, who wanted Sheridan to join Addington's ministry, which had succeeded Pitt's when he failed to carry Catholic emancipation. Both Fox and the prince of Wales urged Sheridan to accept it, but he told them quixotically that he wanted nothing for himself or his family because this would curtail his freedom of speech and action. He feared Fox would join Pitt in a coalition, a fear that led to a decline in his friendship with Fox. His manoeuvring to create a reforming ministry in Ireland under the prince of Wales as lord lieutenant perturbed his whig associates. In 1804, however, the prince appointed him receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall; and, having shown his independence by opposing the prince's wish for a military command, Sheridan accepted it, regaining his influence as the prince's adviser when the king again became ill. 
The money must have been very welcome. The Sheridans, presumably beset by bailiffs, had moved from their George Street house to lodgings in 3 Cork Street in 1803. And Drury Lane, on which Sheridan relied for his personal finance, on which he based his political career, had reached the end of its golden age in 1802 when Kemble, who had raised its receipts by more than a quarter when manager, moved to Covent Garden, taking Mrs Siddons with him. Now only Mrs Jordan, the high-spirited, exuberant mistress of the duke of Clarence, who had joined the company in 1782, remained of the stars, though the thirteen-year-old William Betty, known as the Young Roscius or the Boy, who first appeared at Drury Lane in 1804, was to prove an asset for a while, despite the high salary he commanded. 'The theatrical bubble' (1805), yet another Gillray cartoon, shows Sheridan dressed as Punch blowing bubbles from which Master Betty emerges. Sheridan was enthusiastic about the boy, betting on his drawing $50 or more in one night, describing him to his wife as 'the most lovely creature' and, so as not 'to destroy him', arranging he should only appear three times a week. 
The Gillray caricature preceded the better-known 'Uncorking old-Sherry', a comment on Pitt's sharp reply of 6 March 1805 to Sheridan's long and somewhat rambling speech opposing Pitt's 'Additional Force Bill'. Gillray's depictions of Sheridan are cruel, but his by now mottled complexion, the effect of his drinking to excess ('an abominable habit' according to his first wife in a letter to him of 1790) and his irregular life, made him easy to caricature. 
Sheridan's private life was as turbulent as his political. His obsession with Harriet Bessborough continued to plague him -- and her. Replaced as her lover by Granville Leveson Gower, Sheridan continued to attract and repel and he tried to force his attentions on her. His attitudes were contradictory: high ideals, even puritanical (like his father he wanted to improve the moral and social status of the theatre), warred against the laxity of sexual morals he met in aristocratic circles. His second wife had an affair with Lord Grey, and Sheridan was beset by melancholia in 1806. His heavy drinking was beginning to affect his speeches in parliament, but, between January 1806, when Pitt died, and 1807, his political career seemed to be taking off again. 
In the 'ministry of all the talents' Sheridan became treasurer of the navy and was made a member of the privy council. When Fox died on 13 September 1806 Sheridan might have expected to succeed him as head of the party but the whig grandees did not trust him; they supported Lord Percy instead for Fox's Westminster seat. Sheridan withdrew; the young man held the seat for the seventeen days the government stayed in office; and then Sheridan won it after a disorderly election. But after the subsequent dissolution of parliament he lost it, largely because of William Cobbett's attacks on him. Cobbett described Sheridan's 'agony of mortification', his 'rage too violent to admit of concealment' ('Weekly Political Register', 8 Nov 1806, 715), at the result. These emotions were portrayed in Gillray's savage etching 'View of the hustings in Covent Garden', published for the 'History of the Westminster and Middlesex Elections in the Month of November 1806' (1807). 
This defeat meant, Sheridan said afterwards, his 'total ruin as a public man' ('The Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales, 1770-1812', ed. A. Aspinall, 8 vols., 1963-71, 6.68). He stood for Wexford as joint candidate with John Colclough, killed in a duel by one of the tory candidates, William Congreve Alcock, subsequently elected with 875 votes to Sheridan's 729 and acquitted at his trial for murder. In 1803 Sheridan had suggested to the prince of Wales that he should become president of a new Irish council of which Sheridan would be a member, a manoeuvre (scotched by Lord Grenville) which would have enabled him to introduce Catholic emancipation. In 1807, having accepted the seat for Ilchester, in the gift of the prince of Wales -- not the kind of seat he wanted, but one which meant he could oppose a repressive 'Irish Insurrection Bill' -- he continued to put his views about Irish affairs strongly. In advance of his time in sympathizing with Irish farmers and tenants, in realizing the need for reform of land tenure and in wanting to alleviate the condition of the poor, and, as a protestant, consistently seeking Catholic emancipation for all levels of Irish society, he deplored the ignorance of Ireland displayed by government ministers. 
The energy required to fight the elections of 1806 and 1807 was followed by a need for stoic resilience, for his son Tom's affair with a Mrs Campbell meant her husband was awarded $1500 as a result of his bringing a case against Tom for criminal conversation, and, somehow, Sheridan had to find the money. There followed the destruction of the new Drury Lane Theatre by fire. Sheridan refused to accede to the suggestion in the house that proceedings should be adjourned. He later watched the blaze from the Piazza Coffee House, reputedly saying, 'A man may surely take a glass of wine by his own fireside' (Moore, 2.368). 
This was a devastating blow for Sheridan. He agreed to Samuel Whitbread taking charge of funding the rebuilding and dealing with the theatre's complex debts. Sheridan and his son were excluded from any share in the management of the new theatre which opened in 1811; Sheridan deeply resented the end of the Sheridan family's connection with it. He told the prince of Wales, however, that his debts would be met by the payment of the $40,000 for his half share of the patent ($24,000) and of Tom's quarter share ($12,000) and the fruit shops ($4000). But Whitbread cautiously withheld the money until the claims against Sheridan, some of them patently false, were met, so that the duchy of Cornwall funds became the Sheridans' only income. When an unexpected $1300 turned up in this account, he and Hecca, in a typically feckless way, took a house in Barnes Terrace, where they blew the money in two or three months' lavish living. 
Once the prince became regent in 1811 -- Sheridan having offended Grey and Grenville by redrafting the prince's reply to a deputation from the two houses -- he showed himself lukewarm to Catholic emancipation and reluctant to bring in a whig government. Sheridan, still determined to be independent, giving a 'disinterested denial' to Lord Wellesley's offer of a place in a potential administration, decided to abandon his Ilchester seat. Overestimating likely support, he stood for Stafford again but was defeated in October 1812. The prince offered him an apartment in his palace, but his friendship had cooled, though he sent $3000 to Sheridan's solicitor for the purchase of the Wootton Bassett seat. Sheridan failed to go there to arrange matters, and the money disappeared, probably taken by the solicitor to pay Sheridan's debt to him. The prince later told Croker that he had spent over $20,000 on Sheridan. He had financed, to the extent of $8000, Tom's three failures to be elected an MP, as Sheridan told Hecca in a letter of April 1810, declaring that even in the greatest distress he had refused the offer of even a modest loan for himself from the prince. 
As always deeply anxious about Tom's health, Sheridan managed to get him a post at the Cape of Good Hope in 1813. Hecca, too, was ill, in the early stages of cancer. No longer an MP, Sheridan could now be arrested for debt, and spent a week in a sponging house, raging against Whitbread's refusal to give him $12,000 owed him by Drury Lane, some of which was, however, paid on his release. Tempted by the whigs in the summer asking him to stand for Westminster, he withdrew, thinking correctly that Lord Cochrane had been unjustly expelled from his seat -- he was returned unopposed. Sheridan's financial position was now dire: Hecca's trust could not be touched; he was selling or pawning treasured possessions -- paintings, books, furniture; he was imprisoned again in August 1815. His moods vacillated between despondency and optimism engendered by the hope that an edition of his plays and poems to be published by John Murray would help to pay his debts, which he thought amounted to $3000; he was owed various sums, one as large as $1400. 
Though young enough in mind and spirit to attract the youthful Lord Byron's admiration, Sheridan by 1814 was generally regarded as an old man, though he had survived the tough world of politics and juggled with debts longer than many contemporaries. In December 1815 he became ill, largely confined to bed, but he did manage to attend a few dinner parties and was feted in the green room at Drury Lane. As ever, terrified of being seized by the bailiffs, 'undone and broken-hearted', he wrote to Samuel Rogers that '$150 could remove all difficulties'. Moore brought him the sum in the morning. Sheridan realized that he was dying, but could joke about his rapidly deteriorating health. On 9 May 1816 his sister 'Lissy' (Alicia), who had married Joseph Le Fanu, wrote him a sympathetic and understanding letter to comfort him. She had always been 'fondly attached' to her brother, and now praised his having: 'always shown a noble independence of spirit that the pecuniary difficulties you often had to encounter could not induce you to forgo. As a public man you have been, like the motto of the Le Fanu family, 'sine macula' [without stain]; and I am persuaded had you not been too early thrown upon the world, and alienated from your family, you would have been equally good as a private character. (Moore, 2.452-3)' A friend, Dennis O'Brien, wrote to the 'Morning Post' calling on Sheridan's former fellow politicians to come to his aid. His friends, however, refused an offer of $200 from the prince regent but as Sheridan said to Chateauneuf, who had translated his plays, 'quel sujet de honte pour notre regent qui m'abandonne! Non, je vais mourir et je lui pardonne' ('Shame on the regent for abandoning me! No, I am dying and I forgive him'). 
The prince, when king, gave a vivid but third-hand account of Sheridan's last days. Though the house was stripped virtually bare and the bailiffs were installed in it although forbidden by his doctor to seize him, his son Charles described newspaper accounts as unfounded: his father had every attention and comfort which could make a deathbed easy. Others said he did not want for medical care or friendship (Lady Bessborough visited him) and Hecca, herself ill, was with him when he died at 14 Savile Row on 7 July 1816. His funeral was attended by dukes, earls, lords, viscounts, the lord mayor of London, and other notables. Sheridan would have preferred to be interred near Fox, and recognized as a statesman, but was buried on 13 July in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. 
Byron's famous praise of Sheridan was a warm tribute from a much younger man; he regarded whatever Sheridan had done as 'always the 'best' of its kind'. Certainly Sheridan's two comedies 'The Rivals' and 'The School for Scandal' have amused audiences from their early, immensely successful performances up to the present day, for Sheridan is one of the great comic writers in English. He could create original characters and infuse stock ones with new vitality. Perhaps the best known of all his creations is Mrs Malaprop, whose unintentional misuse of words coined the term 'malapropism'. Other characters reveal themselves in lively, witty dialogue. Sir Anthony Absolute and Sir Lucius O'Trigger are both foils to the two very different pairs of lovers in 'The Rivals', while Lady Sneerwell and Sir Benjamin Backbite balance the contrasting Surface brothers in 'The School for Scandal'. Sheridan's screen scene in this play employs a classic device of comedy to expose most effectively and dramatically the duplicity of Joseph Surface and the silliness of Sir Peter and Lady Teazle. 
Sheridan's wit, his sense of fun, and his mockery of sentimental comedy underpin his depiction of the contrast between appearance and reality. His comic invention exposes folly and hypocrisy through dramatic crises in a timeless way, and this has meant the plays remain alive, not only on stage but in radio and television productions as well. The BBC broadcast no fewer than a dozen versions of 'The School for Scandal' between 1939 and 1978. A 1942 Home Service production featured Vivien Leigh as Lady Teazle. The play was also filmed as early as 1914 and has since been adapted for television numerous times. Scenes from 'The School for Scandal', featuring Greer Garson and Campbell Gullan, were televised in May 1937. Tony Britton, Joan Plowright, and Felix Aylmer were the main players in a BBC 'World Theatre' broadcast of 1959, while Jeremy Brett, Edward Fox, and Pauline Collins were among the cast of a 1975 version. 'The Critic', starring John Gielgud and Nigel Hawthorne, was televised in 1984. 'The Duenna', 'The Rivals', 'St Patrick's Day', and 'A Trip to Scarborough' also formed part of the radio and television repertoire. The unlimited appeal of the plays is demonstrated by their translation into other languages, including a Swedish version of 'The School for Scandal', 'Skandalskolan' (1958), and a Russian adaptation of 'The Duenna', 'Duenya' (1978). 
Sheridan's own character has attracted many biographers since John Watkins and Thomas Moore. Among them are Margaret Oliphant, W. Fraser Rae, Walter Sichel, R. Compton Rhodes, Lewis Gibbs, William A. C. Darlington, Oscar Sherwin, and Madeleine Bingham. Others who explore and interpret the complexities of Sheridan's artistic, social, sexual, and political life include Linda Kelly and Fintan O'Toole, who cast fresh light on the apparent contradictions which often emerge. O'Toole's sparkling account of the ramifications of Sheridan's political career is particularly searching and subtle. 
Studies of Sheridan's contemporaries, such as those dealing with the duchess of Devonshire and Lady Bessborough, have illuminated aspects of his life, while a work by one of his sisters, 'Betsy Sheridan's Journal', suitably edited by William Le Fanu in 1960, gives a lively, frank view of Sheridan's domestic menage and some divagations from it. 
Since Thomas Moore's edition of 'The Works of the Late Richard Brinsley Sheridan' (2 vols., 1821) there have been many editions of the plays over the years, and, in particular, Cecil Price's masterly 'Dramatic Works of Richard Brinsley Sheridan' (2 vols., 1973). This work of elegant scholarship was preceded by his scrupulously and skilfully edited 'Letters of Richard Brinsley Sheridan' (3 vols., 1966). The amount of continuing scholarship and critical activity testifies to the appreciative, investigative interest which has always been taken in Sheridan's life and work. 


@@@@@


doc= 25368


Sheridan, Thomas (1646-1712), government official and Jacobite pamphleteer, was born at St John's, near Trim, co. Meath, the fourth son of Denis Sheridan, Church of Ireland clergyman, and an Englishwoman named Foster. Denis came of an old Irish family, but had been raised a protestant; of Thomas's brothers, Patrick became bishop of Cloyne and William Sheridan bishop of Kilmore. Thomas entered Trinity College, Dublin, in January 1661, graduated BA in 1664, and became a fellow in 1667. In June 1670 he entered the Middle Temple, but soon became involved in the Irish revenue administration and then in a variety of potentially lucrative projects. Early in 1678 he published, anonymously, 'A Discourse of the Rise and Power of Parliaments'. It 'said little about parliament' (Hiller, 108), but Sheridan argued that England needed to maximize its economic potential to counter the threat from France. He denounced religious persecution as economically damaging; laws were needed against religious dissidents, but they should be lightly and sensitively enforced. He argued that Ireland too needed to modernize economically, which would require both freedom of trade and the replacement of the Gaelic language by English. 
In his search for advancement Sheridan had gained the patronage of James, duke of York. This proved embarrassing during the exclusion crisis, and in December 1680 he was imprisoned and interrogated on suspicion of complicity in the Popish Plot. Released early in 1681, he embarked on a plan to farm the Irish revenue. In 1683 or 1684 he married Helen ('c'.1662-1702), daughter of Thomas Appleby of Lynton-on-Ouse, Yorkshire, a Roman Catholic. Described as 'about forty' when she died in 1702, she was already a widow when she married Sheridan; her first husband was called Ravenscroft. A son, Thomas Sheridan, was born in 1684; two daughters and another son followed. When James II became king, Sheridan announced his conversion to Catholicism, days after the judges' decision in 'Godden v. Hales' (June 1686) opened the way for Catholics to hold offices in England. James, however, had work for Sheridan in Ireland. He regarded Henry Hyde, earl of Clarendon, the lord lieutenant, as prejudiced against protestants, but feared that his Catholic rival, Richard Talbot, earl of Tyrconnell, was so anti-protestant as to cause anxiety among his English protestant subjects and harboured thoughts of separating Ireland from England after James's death. When James appointed Tyrconnell lord deputy in January 1687, in Clarendon's place, he appointed Sheridan his secretary and, later, first commissioner of the revenue. Sheridan proved no match for the formidable Tyrconnell; his complaints that Tyrconnell appointed and dismissed officials purely on religious grounds were countered by Tyrconnell with accusations of corruption. A hearing before a group of judges in Ireland upheld Tyrconnell's allegations and Sheridan was removed from his offices on 20 January 1688. 
Sheridan followed James into exile in January 1689, determined to clear his name. He published an anti-Williamite pamphlet (widely ascribed to George Savile, marquess of Halifax) entitled 'A Letter from a Nobleman in London to his Friend in the Country' (1690) and wrote several tracts which were not published. Whereas he had earlier advocated a measure of toleration and argued that religion should not influence appointments to office, his later tracts show him as both a bigoted Catholic and a forceful proponent of absolute monarchy. He saw James's religion as the sole reason for his expulsion and argued that there could be no compromising the one true faith. Such views were too extreme and intransigent for a king trying to woo his former subjects and the tracts were never published. He no longer claimed that the Gaels were inferior to the English, arguing that the Irish had been uniquely 'faithful' to the Stuarts. He went on a diplomatic mission to the Palatinate in 1695, and in 1699 he was appointed a commissioner of the royal household. His 'Narrative', written in 1702, 'sheds valuable light on James II's Irish policy' (Hiller, 128). Sheridan died on 7/17 March 1712 at St Germain-en-Laye and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 25369


Sheridan, Thomas (1687-1738), schoolmaster and Church of Ireland clergyman, was born in co. Cavan, Ireland, the son of Patrick Sheridan, a farmer of whom nothing more is certainly known. He attended the school of John Jones, the Dublin schoolmaster who was Jonathan Swift's contemporary at Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1707, at the relatively late age of twenty, entered Trinity himself. He graduated BA in 1711, was ordained priest in 1712, and took his MA in 1714. In 1710 or 1711, still 'in the mad years of life' (Dolan, 5), he married Elizabeth, only child of Charles and Anne McFadden of Quilca, near Virginia, in co. Cavan. 
Sheridan apparently began his teaching career before 1714, in Irish classical schools, which emphasized the Latin classics and trained their boys to be young gentlemen. Like other enlightened schoolmasters of the period he decried teaching Latin through 'a Heap of Rules' and by 'frightening... [boys] out of their Wits' (T. Sheridan, 'An Easy Introduction of Grammar in English for the Understanding of the Latin Tongue', 1714, preface), and in 1714 published his own improved version of Lily's 'Royal Grammar', using English verse as a mnemonic aid. It is not certain how he met Swift but their acquaintance probably began in 1717, when Sheridan was a well-established and notably successful Dublin schoolmaster. His remarkable talents as a classical scholar and modern linguist impressed and attracted Swift, as, even more so, did his taste for satire and wordplay in both verse and prose. He was soon tutoring Swift in Greek, while Swift for his part took an active interest in Sheridan's school, finding peculiar delight in his role as examiner. Sheridan's preference in school for the verbal -- rather than the actual -- lash found favour with Swift, who described his friend as 'doubtless the best instructor of youth in these kingdoms' (Swift, 216). 
Though a priest, Sheridan had no benefice until 1725, when he was thirty-eight, and ran his school as a private enterprise. Probably with an eye to preferment and additional income, he took the degrees of BD in 1724 and DD in 1726. In the meantime, in 1725, Swift interceded with the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Carteret, to obtain for Sheridan the living of Rincurran, in co. Cork, and an appointment as one of Carteret's domestic chaplains. Seldom far from the ludicrous, Sheridan -- it seems through sheer carelessness -- promptly chose the anniversary of the Hanoverian succession to preach a sermon on the text 'Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof'. If no malice was intended, such a sentiment coming from a high-church tory was bound to cause comment, and when Carteret was informed of what had happened he stripped Sheridan of the chaplaincy and barred him from Dublin Castle. Subsequent attempts to secure patronage and gain preferment failed, and in 1730 Sheridan exchanged the living of Rincurran for that of Dunboyne and Kilbride, in co. Meath, near Dublin and on the way to his estate in Quilca. In 1735, with the income from his school in Dublin declining, he closed the school and exchanged the Dunboyne living for the Royal School in Cavan, a move that helped to stabilize his always rickety finances. 
To a mind teeming with learning and humour were added a feckless and vague character and a build more suited to a mouse than a man, with accompanying shrill and squeaky voice. The nicknames Tom Titt and Tom Dingle suited Sheridan well, as did his 'nom de guerre', Tom Pun-sibi, under which name his 'Art of Punning' appeared in 1719 and which more generally expressed the 'pun-ishment' he took and inflicted on Swift and others in his mock-serious 'pun-ic wars'. On the subject of his unhappy marriage, which produced nine children, including the actor-manager Thomas Sheridan (1719?-1788), his humour turned to acid, and in 1735 he told Swift that he had been 'linked to the Devil for twenty-four years, with a coal in my heart, which was kindled in the first week I married her' (Dolan, 5). The sad union reinforced his own view of his greatest failing: 'I am famous for giving the best advice and following the worst' (ibid., 22). Consolation came from his intimacy with Swift, and though the relationship was at times strained, since neither was afraid to dwell on the other's faults, its closeness may be seen from their long stays with one another, the financial help given by Swift to Sheridan, and the care that Sheridan bestowed on Esther Johnson (Stella) in her last illness. 
Sheridan's literary work was, like Swift's, in large part an extension of his character. Doggerel and other nonsense, including farces performed on the Dublin stage, poured from his pen. On his more serious side, he translated Sophocles, Persius, Guarini, and Tasso. In 1728 and 1729 the Dublin periodical 'The Intelligencer' appeared, each number comprising a separate contribution from Swift or Sheridan, with Irish economic, social, and political issues as the general theme. 
By 1737 Sheridan was in failing health, and he left the school in Cavan to return to Dublin. According to his son Thomas he was at the end insulted and shunned by the increasingly gloomy dean. He retired to a friend's house in Rathfarnham and died there on 10 October 1738, of 'a dropsy and asthma', according to Swift, or of 'a polypus in the heart', according to his son. In his will he left only 5's'. to his 'unkind wife'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25370


Sheridan, Thomas (1684-1746), Jacobite official, was the eldest of the four children of Thomas Sheridan (1646-1712), government official and Jacobite pamphleteer, and his wife, Helen ('c'.1662-1702), daughter of Thomas Appleby of Lynton-on-Ouse, Yorkshire, and his wife, Helen. (Family legend maintains that Helen Sheridan was actually the illegitimate daughter of the future James II and Anne Hyde, before their marriage.) Some contemporary documents refer to Sheridan as Irish, but evidence to ascertain if there was more to this than paternal descent is lacking. His mother was a Roman Catholic, and his father converted to Catholicism in 1686. The family followed James II into exile in France following the events of 1688, and Sheridan was educated at the Jesuit College Louis-le-Grand in Paris. He may also have spent some time in Rome as a youth. 
About 1706 Sheridan went to London to study law, and on 18 January of that year was admitted to the Middle Temple. Following the death of Queen Anne in 1714 he returned to France and became a courier in the Jacobite rising of 1715. In 1717 and 1718 he carried messages back and forth in the Jacobite attempt to instigate a Russo-Swedish alliance against the Hanoverians, travelling widely in northern and eastern Europe. Late 1720 saw him at the Jacobite court in Rome, where he was employed in both secretarial and diplomatic capacities. In 1725 he became under-governor to Prince Charles Edward Stuart, and his indulgent and devoted care of the boy, while not an educational success, none the less created a uniquely strong bond of trust between them. The following year (17 March 1726) Sheridan was awarded an Irish baronetcy by James III (James Francis Edward Stuart). In 1734 he accompanied the prince to his first military engagement -- the siege of Gaeta in the kingdom of Naples. He played a key role in the elaborate subterfuge designed to conceal Charles's journey to Paris in 1744, when it was believed that the French were about to restore the Stuarts. Once established in the French capital Charles soon sent for Sir Thomas, who, after a brief period of princely disfavour, became actively involved in the young prince's plans to mount a rising in Scotland. He was one of the 'seven men of Moidart' who landed on the Scottish coast with the prince in July 1745 and was present throughout the subsequent campaign. In poor health and in his early sixties (not seventies as some modern accounts maintain), and lacking a military background, his role was secretarial and advisory. A member of the prince's council, he was criticized by a number of the Scottish members for being a key figure in a perceived Irish coterie around the prince. After defeat at the battle of Culloden in 1746 Sheridan managed to escape to France, whence he was summoned to Rome by James III to explain his part in the recent events. It was in Rome that Sheridan died, unmarried, of a stroke on 23 November 1746; he was buried there the following day in the church of the Twelve Apostles. 


@@@@@


doc= 25371


Sheridan, Thomas (1719?-1788), actor and orthoepist, was probably born in early 1719, though no records of birth or baptism have been found. His father, Dr Thomas Sheridan (1687-1738), was by then running a highly regarded school at his house in Capel Street, Dublin, but there is a possibility that Thomas, his third son, was born in Quilca, co. Cavan, perhaps in the childhood home of his mother, Elizabeth MacFadden. Jonathan Swift, a close friend of Dr Sheridan, was Thomas's godfather and, by Sheridan's own account, a beneficent influence on him from childhood. Towards the end of his life he published a seventeen-volume edition of Swift's 'Works' (1784), of which volume 1 was his own 'Life of Doctor Swift'. His early education was at his father's school, where the performance of plays was encouraged. The chance to play Antony in 'Julius Caesar' in 1732 may have had a profound effect on Sheridan. Ambitious for his favourite son, Dr Sheridan enrolled him at Westminster School in 1733, but was financially unable to sustain him there, and it was with the aid of a scholarship that Sheridan entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1735. Dr Sheridan died suddenly on 10 October 1738, a year before his son graduated, leaving his large family in straitened circumstances. The need to make money combined with his love of the theatre to draw Sheridan to the Dublin stage, and he made his first appearance at Smock Alley on 29 January 1743 as Richard III, in which part, in the view of the 'Dublin Gazette' (25 January-1 February 1743) he 'vastly excelled whatever had at any Time been seen [in] the Kingdom before'. 
This was the beginning of the turbulent history of Sheridan's attempts to raise the standard of the Dublin theatre. It is a mixed history of honest endeavour, social and intellectual snobbery, wise economy, extravagance, and paranoia. Sheridan's ambition is clear from the parts he played in his first season. They included Brutus, Othello, and King Lear. His fiery self-regard is clear, too, in his preparedness to cross swords with a visiting celebrity, Theophilus Cibber. Their quarrel in July 1743 threatened to disrupt the season, and for once Cibber was more in the right than his adversary. Coincidentally the dispute brought about the meeting between Sheridan and his future wife, the novelist Frances Chamberlaine (1724-1766) ['see 'Sheridan, Frances], to whom he was married by 1747. Nurturing managerial ambitions, Sheridan travelled to London at the end of the 1743-4 season. He made his debut in 'Hamlet' at Covent Garden on 31 March 1744 and joined the Drury Lane company for the 1744-5 season, during which he established an edgy friendship with David Garrick. 
Two decisions made in Dublin in 1744-5 were to have a long-term effect on Sheridan's life. The first led to the uniting into a single company of Dublin's two theatres, Aungier Street and Smock Alley, the second to Sheridan's appointment as manager of the united company. His first period of management (1745-54) began triumphantly, aided by his recruiting of Garrick and George Anne Bellamy. By July 1746 he was prosperous enough to buy Quilca House, Cavan, from his mother, presumably with an eye to his forthcoming marriage, which probably took place in 1747. Sheridan's second season as manager was marred by an incident that gave rise to the notorious Kelly riot. Kelly, a Galway 'gentleman', had made a drunken assault on one of the Smock Alley actresses at a performance of Vanbrugh's 'Aesop' on 19 January 1747, and Sheridan had twice forcibly expelled him from the theatre. Kelly's supporters considered this a player's affront to a gentleman, and expressed their outrage two nights later by breaking up a performance, storming the stage, and physically damaging the backstage area. Kelly's trial was perceived in part, not least by Sheridan, as a test of the manager's right to the status of 'gentleman'. There were sections of the Dublin public that never forgave him. Often high-handed, he lacked the diplomatic skills of a manager. Charles Macklin in 1748 and West Digges in 1754 publicly resented his treatment of them, and he offended Dublin society in March 1750 by refusing to release his musicians for a charity concert at the New Garden. But it was politics that precipitated the crisis of 2 March 1754. As one of the founders of the Beefsteak Club in 1752, Sheridan was readily associated with the 'English' party in Dublin, and it was perhaps unfortunate that George II's proroguing of the Irish parliament coincided with a revival of James Miller's 'Mahomet' at Smock Alley on 2 February 1754. A speech susceptible to patriotic Irish sentiment was vigorously encored. In what was to prove a critical moment in his life, Sheridan resolved on a second performance, and the result, on 2 March 1754, was the riot that wrecked the interior of the theatre and brought Sheridan to financial ruin from which he never fully recovered. In a sad footnote to the riot and ensuing debate, the Sheridans' infant son, christened Sackville in honour of the duke of Dorset (vice-regent of Ireland at the time), died of convulsions. 
Sheridan sublet the theatre and took refuge in London, where he performed to lukewarm audiences at Covent Garden during the 1754-5 season most of his favourite leading roles. He was not re-engaged. Instead, he spent the winter of 1755 preparing for publication a book entitled 'British Education' (1756) and for delivery a series of twelve lectures on spoken English. Financial constraints drove him to return to the management of Smock Alley in May 1756, though with diminished enthusiasm. This second term was scarred by grudges and disputes, above all with John Lee and Spranger Barry. It was Barry's opening of a new theatre in Crow Street, Dublin, in October 1758 that drove Sheridan back to London. He had recently mortgaged Quilca House for the second time, and his Irish debts amounted to over $7000. The Sheridans now had four children to care for. Thomas, their eldest son, had died aged three, but had been followed by Charles Francis Sheridan (1750-1806), Richard Brinsley Sheridan (1751-1816), Alicia, later Alicia Le Fanu (1753-1817) ['see under 'Le Fanu, Philip], the aforementioned Sackville, and (Anne) Elizabeth Craford ('bap'. 1756). Sheridan was hoping for a new career in education, bolstered by Oxford University's incorporation of him as a master of arts in November 1758 (Cambridge would follow suit in 1769). Between 1759 and 1762 he published discourses on the theatre, on education, and on the English language, and began work on a dictionary towards which he was awarded an annual pension of $200 and which was published in two volumes in 1780. Always liable to live beyond his means, he moved his family with three servants to Windsor in September 1759, planning to live by teaching, lecturing, and publishing, but need impelled him to return to Drury Lane for the 1760-61 season. 
A little grudgingly, Churchill's 'Rosciad' (1761) placed Sheridan second to Garrick on the scale of genius, but this is to overrate his acting. Physically slight and vocally uneven, Sheridan was ill-suited to the heroic parts he favoured, though he was conscientious in delivering the meaning of his lines and disciplined in his preparation. He continued to act, in short bursts dictated by financial need, until 1777, mostly in London and Dublin, but also in Edinburgh, where he was awarded the freedom of the city on 6 July 1761. Plagued from youth by indigestion and in adulthood by creditors, he took his family to France in 1764, with the declared intention of curing the first and the undeclared intention of escaping the second, but the period of voluntary exile was brought to an end by his wife's death on 26 September 1766. 
Sheridan had never had a settled home, and he had few enduring friendships. A brief period of residence in Bath in 1770-71 enabled him, in conjunction with the musical Linley family, to launch a series of 'Attic Evening's Entertainments', with songs by Thomas Linley sung by his daughter Elizabeth, and recitations by Sheridan. The involvement of his brilliant son Richard Brinsley Sheridan with Elizabeth Linley, and their later marriage, caused a serious breach between father and son, in which Sheridan's tendency to a sense of moral and social superiority was characteristically alert. He was hurt by Richard's failure to invite his assistance in the management of Drury Lane in 1776, and when, in September 1778, 'he agreed to put the management into my hands upon condition that I should not appear as a performer' (letter to Charles Sheridan, dated 15 April 1783), the relationship remained tense. Sheridan worked with his son and Thomas Linley at Drury Lane until the end of the season in 1780, all the time waiting for the call to return to Dublin and save the Irish theatre. He was now being cared for by his younger daughter, Elizabeth, with whom he left Dublin 'en route' for Portugal, in search of the Lisbon cure, in 1788. They got no further than Margate, where, on 14 August 1788, Sheridan died, with Elizabeth and a penitent Richard in attendance. He was buried, according to his own wish, where he died and 'in as private and cheap a manner as possible' -- in fact, in the centre aisle of St Peter's Church on the Isle of Thanet, on 21 August. In 1823 Samuel Parr arranged for a memorial tablet in praise of Sheridan's intellect. Sheridan left the residue of his estate to his two daughters. All four of his surviving children became eminent in their way, among them the politician Charles Francis Sheridan. 


@@@@@


doc= 25372


Sheridan, Thomas (1775-1817), actor and soldier, was born at Orchard Street, London, on 17 November 1775, the only son of Richard Brinsley Sheridan (1751-1816) and his first wife, Elizabeth Ann (Eliza) Linley (1754-1792). His father described him at two months old in typically glowing terms to his maternal grandfather Thomas Linley as having 'talents for music and the most perfect integrity of mind' ('Letters', 1.101). He sent the boy to Dr Samuel Parr (who had taught him and been kind to him when he was a pupil at Harrow) at the school Parr set up at Hatton in Warwickshire in 1786. Parr, at Richard Sheridan's request, broke the news to Tom that he was to go to Hotwells, Bristol, where his mother was dying. 
After her death, while Tom was a great comfort to his father, he was also running wild at Sheridan's mansion in Isleworth, so Sheridan arranged that William Smyth, a recent graduate from Peterhouse and later professor of modern history at Cambridge, should tutor him. Smyth's 'Memoir of Mr Sheridan' (1840) described Richard Sheridan as over-fussy about his son, citing his neurotic anxiety when the tutor allowed Tom to skate on ice he thought strong enough to support a wagon. Charles Grey told Sheridan he should have a glass case made for Tom. 
Smyth records Tom's reaction to his father's telling him he was going to marry Hecca, as he called Hester Jane Ogle, a frisky girl of nineteen, making out in two hours' talking that it was the most sensible thing he could do: 'Was this not very clever of him? Well, my dear Mr S., you should have been tutor to him. I am incomparably the most rational of the two.' Smyth describes Tom at Cambridge as the idol of the young men who pronounced him the cleverest man in the place. Cambridge was 'a great expense' and the ruin of all Smyth's schemes for Tom's education. 
The question of what Tom was to make of his life was bound up with his father's theatrical and political fortunes. The easy-going Tom was charming and intelligent, but lacked his father's driving ambition and hoped his father, with whom he got on well, would buy him a seat in parliament. Richard Sheridan did better: he got the prince of Wales to finance Tom's three electoral failures, at Liskeard and Stafford. The duke of York offered Tom a post as aide-de-camp, at the king's 'express commands', but his father told him to refuse this. Richard Sheridan was himself being courted by the king and his friend Henry Addington, prime minister since 1801, who wanted him in his administration. Fox and the prince both pressed Richard Sheridan to accept office if only to provide for Tom. On his father's advice Tom rejected the surveyorship of the duchy of Cornwall and the registrarship of the vice-admiralty court in Malta before accepting a cornetcy in the prince of Wales's own regiment, the 10th light dragoons, and becoming aide-de-camp to Lord Moira when he became commander-in-chief, Scotland, in 1803. 
In Edinburgh, Tom's affair with Mrs Peter Campbell led to his being sued for and pleading guilty to criminal conversation. The case brought him into some ridicule, Mary Brotherton, the housekeeper, testifying that Tom in his uniform had been at the house when Mr Campbell was in London, leaving only at the housekeeper's threat to shoot him if he didn't leave at once. Campbell was awarded $1500, which Sheridan paid, borrowing the large sum from the Drury Lane actors. 
Tom then ran away with Caroline Henrietta Callander (1779-1851) ['see 'Sheridan, Caroline Henrietta], marrying her on 21 June 1805. Richard Sheridan pronounced his daughter-in-law lovely and engaging. Tom and she had four sons and three daughters. The eldest son, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, followed family tradition and ran away with Marcia Maria, daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir Colquhoun Grant, a considerable heiress; he sat in parliament from 1845 to 1868 (his son Algernon Thomas Brinsley Sheridan merely resided comfortably in his paternal grandfather's place, Frampton Court in Dorset). The three daughters also married well: the eldest became Lady Dufferin and later countess of Gifford; the second Caroline Norton and later Lady Stirling Maxwell; and the third Lady Seymour and later duchess of Somerset. 
Richard Sheridan, appointed receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall by the prince in 1804, tried in vain to get the prince to transfer the position to the newly married Tom. He had provided handsomely for his other son, Charles, but Tom's financial future still remained a problem. Finally Tom became muster-master general in Ireland in 1806, in which year Richard Sheridan gave him a quarter-share in the Drury Lane Theatre. Tom came back from Ireland to canvass Stafford unsuccessfully in 1806 and 1807. Tom, now sole manager of Drury Lane, negotiated skilfully with the lord chancellor to warn off potential rivals, the non-patent holders; at the same time he became joint proprietor and sole manager of the Lyceum Theatre. A good singer and comic actor, he had inherited the Linley family's musical talents and the Sheridans' literary skills. His poem on the loss of the 'Saldanha' was praised; he wrote 'Descriptions of Characters' (1808), 'a grand ballet of action' staged in Drury Lane, and his melodrama 'The Russian' first staged on 13 May 1813 ran for ten further performances. 
That production, however, came after the disastrous fire of February 1808 destroyed Drury Lane. The prince provided $1000 and the dukes of Bedford and Devon $500 each to help Tom through the financial crisis. His health was growing worse: he had inherited the tuberculosis that killed his mother. A stay at Puerto de Santa Maria improved his breathing -- a debt of $1400 was cancelled by his father's efforts on his return -- but the next year Sicily's climate did not ameliorate his condition. 
Both Tom and his father had refused to receive any of the funds they were due until the new Drury Lane Theatre was built (both were excluded from any say in it), but in November 1811 Richard Sheridan told Tom that he would get '$12,000 clear', adding that this was 'the last sum of money in the shape of profit any man will ever get out of a THEATRE' ('Letters', 3.134). In a letter to his uncle Charles Ward, Tom had earlier blamed his father for what was probably his own lack of independence and ambition, by saying that Richard Sheridan constantly pointed at the theatre as Tom's ultimate object; it was to be his, and so, he said, he had been excluded from all other pursuits. 
By February 1812 Tom described himself as 'ill in health and spirits and as thin as a Highland crop of oats' ('Letters', 3.177n.). He tried Madeira again, and then the duke of York obtained for him the post of colonial treasurer at the Cape of Good Hope, supposedly beneficial for lung complaints. (There was no atom of obligation to the prince or his ministers, his father told him cheerfully.) Taking their daughter Helen with them, Tom and his wife left their other children in the care of relatives and sailed for the Cape in 1813. There Tom died of consumption on 12 September 1817. 


@@@@@


doc= 25373


Sheridan, William (1635-1711), nonjuring Church of Ireland bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh, was born in Togher, near Kilmore, co. Cavan, the eldest surviving son of Denis Sheridan (c.1610-1683?), vicar of Killesher, co. Fermanagh, and his first wife, Jane ('c'.1610- 'c'.1643), daughter of Anthony Atkinson of Geashill, King's county. A member of a Gaelic Irish family long associated with the district of Kilmore, his father had been brought up a protestant in the house of John Hill, dean of Kilmore. William was named after his godfather, Bishop William Bedell, who had ordained his father and left the youth 40's'. in his will to buy a mourning ring. He had a brother, Patrick (1638-1682), and two half-brothers, Thomas Sheridan (1646-1712) and James ('b'. 1649). William was privately educated, partly by his father, before he and his brother Patrick entered Trinity College, Dublin, as fellow-commoners in May 1652. Although his first degree is not recorded, he graduated DD in 1682. At an unknown date he married Mary O'Reilly, presumably also from co. Cavan, with whom he had a son, Donald. 
After his ordination Sheridan was chaplain to Sir Maurice Eustace, the first lord chancellor of Ireland after the Restoration, and was subsequently chaplain to the duke of Ormond. Rector of Athenry, co. Galway, in 1667, he became dean of Down two years later (25 August 1669), though he was in England that autumn and had permission to remain there until his health recovered. In fact poor health was to be a recurring theme of his correspondence later in his life. During Ormond's last viceroyalty, and thanks to his influence, Sheridan was formally appointed bishop of Kilmore in January 1682 (though at first intended for Raphoe), holding it with the diocese of Ardagh. His brother Patrick had been appointed bishop of Cloyne in 1679. 
Sheridan seems to have left Ireland in the latter part of James II's reign. Unlike four other Church of Ireland bishops, he did not sit in James II's Irish parliament of May-June 1689, though unlike them he was deprived under William III for not taking the necessary oaths prescribed by the 1691 act. As the only nonjuring bishop in the Church of Ireland, he moved to London, where he lived close to other nonjurors. Impoverished, in poor health, and continuing to sign himself 'Wm Kilmore' (sometimes adding 'dispossest.'), he was clearly on the conscience of some at least of the conforming clergy. William King of Derry did what he could to help, and was warmly thanked by Sheridan, as was the tory earl of Huntingdon, for whose 'so often repeated charity... I want words to express my gratitude' ('Hastings MSS', 2.300). 
At the beginning of Queen Anne's reign an attempt associated with the lay nonjuror Henry Dodwell to heal the schism in the Church of Ireland, which by this stage effectively centred on Sheridan, petered out. However, for a time thereafter he was apparently paid an allowance out of Kilmore diocesan coffers, a voluntary support which had come to an end before mid-1707, Archbishop King being told in 1708 that Sheridan's successor but one in Kilmore, Edward Wetenhall, 'has not sent him one penny since last midsummer was a year, and then but tenn guineas' ('Second Report', HMC, 244). It was ironic that it should be Wetenhall who failed to keep up payments on Sheridan's allowance, as he had sat in James II's parliament as bishop of Cork and had required convincing in 1691 that William and Mary were lawful sovereigns. Having endured years of poor health, during which he was cared for by a niece who herself became ill in the process, Sheridan died in London on 3 October 1711 and was buried later that month at Fulham. 


@@@@@


doc= 25374


Sheriff, Lawrence (c.1515-1567), benefactor of Rugby School, was probably born in Rugby or nearby, the son of a wealthy yeoman family. After serving his apprenticeship he became a full member of the Grocers' Company about 1541, living in Newgate Street, London. He built up a prosperous trade in spices, supplying Princess Elizabeth's house at Hatfield during the 1550s. His loyalty is demonstrated by an incident which took place in the Rose tavern, Newgate, in 1554. Farrer, a haberdasher, accused the princess of being involved in Wyatt's rebellion: 'Some of them hope that she shall have the crown, but she, and they, I trust, shall hop headless or be fried with faggots, before she come to it' (Foxe, 3.951). Sheriff protested strongly and took the case before Bishop Bonner who, in the political and religious climate of the time, tried to appease both parties. 
Sheriff's loyalty ultimately paid off and in 1559 he was granted a coat of arms bearing the griffin, a mythical beast which supposedly guards the treasures of the East. In 1561, he presented the queen with 'a sugar loaf, a box of ginger, a box of nutmeg and a pound of cinnamon' as a new year's gift, and in return he received 'one gilt salt with a cover (weighing) seven ounces'. In 1566 he was elected vice-warden of the Grocers' Company. On 22 July 1567 he made his will in which he describes himself as 'sick of body'. His request was to be buried in St Andrew's Church, Rugby, though in fact it appears that he was buried in Christ Church Greyfriars, the old Greyfriars Church, which was destroyed in the great fire of London in 1666. A surviving parish register records that he was buried on 16 September 1567. In his will, among other bequests, he gave to his wife, Elizabeth (died 1579), his 'grey ambling nagge', his 'chayne of gold weighing twenty ounces' and his 'gold ring with a picture of death uppon it' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/49). 
Sheriff's will also set out his intent to endow 'a free grammar schoole... to serve chiefly for the children of Rugby and... of other places thereunto adjoyneing', to be called 'the free schoole of Lawrence Sheriffe'. Bequests of a charitable nature were not uncommon in the sixteenth century, particularly from one of new wealth and with no hereditary estates to maintain. Protestantism emphasized the importance of education as a means to religious enlightenment, although the desire to perpetuate his name may have been no small inducement. There was to be money for 'a fayre and convenyient schoole house', and also for 'meet and distincte lodgeings for four poor men' to be built nearby, the foundation of today's almshouses. A schoolmaster was provided for with a yearly salary of $12. The four poor men were to have 'sevenpence by the week' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/49). These ventures were to be endowed with all Sheriff's lands in Warwickshire, though, as this would not be sufficient, he added a further $100 for more land to be bought locally. On 31 August 1567, Sheriff added a codicil which revoked the grant of $100 and instead bestowed upon the school 24 acres of land in Holborn, only half a mile from the city of London. The rents from this have helped to sustain Rugby School and Lawrence Sheriff School to this day. 


@@@@@


doc= 25375


Sheringham, Robert (c.1604-1678), orientalist, was a son of William Sheringham of Guestwick, Norfolk, and his wife, Elizabeth; he had at least one sister. He was educated at Norwich under Mr Briggs, and entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 15 March 1619. He proceeded BA in 1623 and MA in 1626, and was incorporated in the same degree at Oxford on 15 July 1628. Ordained deacon at Peterborough on 28 March 1626 and priest on 29 June, he was elected a fellow of his Cambridge college in the same year. In 1634 he was presented to the rectory of Patesley in Norfolk, a living in the gift of Caius, but he was not resident. In the early years of his fellowship he occupied various posts. He acted as Greek lecturer in 1630, Hebrew lecturer in 1633, and dean in 1642, and in 1644 he was elected one of the proctors of Cambridge University. In the following year he issued his first publication, the text of two elegant sermons delivered at St Mary's, Cambridge, on 'Psalm' 41: 4. 
In 1648 Sheringham proved himself an accomplished Hebraist with the publication of a Latin translation of the Mishnaic tractate on priests and sacrifices, 'Joma'. It coincided with a plan devised in the circle of Samuel Hartlib, John Amos Comenius, and John Durie to make lesser known Hebrew sources more widely available. Sheringham, however, proceeded independently. His work is a landmark in Hebrew studies. In his preface he presents an eloquent defence of the rabbinic writings and their use for Christian biblicists, and stresses the debt of the gospels to a Jewish tradition which can best be discovered by studying the 'Talmud'. His edition was inferior to the Mishnaic tractates about to be produced at Oxford under the supervision of Edward Pococke, but it remains a pioneering work which marks the beginning of an ever more sophisticated English treatment of Jewish writings. It was reprinted in the Netherlands in 1696, edited by Jacob Rhenferd, one of the foremost experts on the ancient languages of the Near East, of which he was professor at the University of Franeker. 
Sheringham was deeply committed to the royalist cause. He dedicated his edition of the 'Joma' to a prominent royalist, the mathematician Sir John Heydon, also from Norfolk. In 1651, after refusing to submit to parliament, Sheringham forfeited his fellowship at Caius and departed for the Netherlands. He would seem to have made preparations for his arrival in the previous year as the college registers show that he left Cambridge at the end of October 1649. He may have gone first to London, but he matriculated as a student of medicine at the University of Leiden on 4 March 1650. By November he was back at Caius and was still in England in February of the following year. 
In the Netherlands, besides other scholarly refugees such as Thomas Marshall, he found a friend in Sir Edward Nicholas, the former secretary of state. By May 1653 he was in The Hague, temporarily acting as chaplain to Charles I's daughter Mary, who was married to the prince of Orange. Subsequently Sheringham moved to Rotterdam, where he gave tuition to fellow emigrants in Hebrew, Arabic, Aramaic, and Syriac. One of his pupils, Thomas Cawton the younger, the son of the minister of the English church, proceeded to the University of Utrecht in 1657 with what was regarded as a remarkable command of the languages which Sheringham had taught him. 
In his first years in the Netherlands, Sheringham composed his justification of royal absolutism warranted, he claimed, by the statutes, common law, and ancient customs of England, 'The kings supremacy asserted, or, A remonstrance of the kings right against the pretended parliament'. In 1653 Nicholas sent a copy to Edward Hyde, saying it is 'well worth your perusal, notwithstanding you have read and written much on the same subject' ('Nicholas Papers', 2.14). Containing an extensive critique of Philip Hunton's 'Treatise of Monarchy' the work was intended to serve as a weapon against the parliamentary agents in the Low Countries. Sheringham had originally hoped to publish it in Dutch, but it appeared in English in 1660, dedicated to Charles II. It was reprinted again in 1682. 
With the Restoration, Sheringham returned to Cambridge and was re-elected to his fellowship at Caius. In July 1663 he described himself in a letter to Thomas Marshall as 'being at the University, but living for the most part in London' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Marshall 134, fol. 16). He later spent more time in his college, where he was appointed catechist in 1666, 1672, and 1673 and Hebrew lecturer again from 1674 to 1677. His main work, 'De Anglorum gentis origine', appeared in 1670. Based on a vast assortment of Gothic and early English sources, it argues for the descent of the English from the Getae, whom Sheringham, like many of his contemporaries, identified with the Goths. Rejecting the widespread idea that they were descended from Noah's son Japhet, however, he maintained that they were the descendants of Shem, had moved from Scythia to Scandinavia, had then emigrated to the Baltic and Germany, and had gone from there to Asia and back to Germany. Although the work was never reprinted it was quoted with respect by James Tyrrell in 1698, Thomas Herne in 1744, and David Wilkins in 1748. But by 1770 Thomas Percy was critical of Sheringham's inability 'to distinguish what is true and credible from what is improbable and fabulous in the old Northern Chronicles. Because some parts are true, he receives all for authentic' (Mallet, viii). 
At Cambridge, Sheringham was greatly admired as a linguist, his knowledge of Gothic and other Germanic languages as well as the Semitic ones drawing high praise from John Gostlin, the future vice-master of Caius. On 17 April 1678 Sheringham drew up his will 'sick in body', bequeathing most of his library to his college (will, 166). He had already presented Caius with a fine fifteenth-century manuscript, probably written by the Chaucerian copyist Shirley and containing works by Richard Rolle (Gonville and Caius College, MS 669/646), and a copy of the liturgical acts and epistles printed in Church Slavonic in Moscow in 1564. At some point during the next two weeks he died in his rooms in college and was buried at the church of St Michael on 2 May 1678. 


@@@@@


doc= 25376


Sherley, Thomas (bap. 1638, d. 1678), physician and natural philosopher, the son of Sir Thomas Shirley ('bap'. 1597, died 'c'.1656), of Wiston, Sussex, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir George Blundell, of Cardington, Bedfordshire, and grandson of Sir Thomas Sherley (1564-1633/4), was born in the parish of St Margaret, Westminster, London, and baptized on 15 October 1638. He lived with his father in Magdalen College while the king's troops were in Oxford, and was educated at Magdalen School. It is likely that for a time between 1653 and 1656 Sherley was a pupil of Henry Oldenburg, with whom he formed a lasting friendship. While living in Wigan in 1659 he developed an interest in natural philosophy, as attested by his observations of sulphurous exhalations in Lancashire, which he subsequently published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society (3 June 1667). The report was criticized by Adam Martindale (1623-1686), a preacher at Manchester, who in a letter to Oldenburg dated 4 November 1670 maintained that Sherley's paper was of little or no interest for natural history. Sherley studied medicine in France, where he took the degree of MD. He was twice married: first to Hannah, daughter of John Harfleet, of Fleet, Kent, with whom he had two daughters, Anne and Margaret. On 5 June 1667 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Captain Richard Baskett, of Apps, Isle of Wight, with whom he had two sons, Thomas and Richard, and a daughter, Elizabeth. 
Sherley appears to have had a military career which ended in 1667, when he began to practise medicine in London. By 1672 he was claiming to be physician-in-ordinary to Charles II; in the same year he published his 'Philosophicall essay declaring the probable causes whence stones are produced in the greater world', dedicated to George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham. Sherley's 'Essay' was not confined to the study of the generation of stones, but dealt also with the principles of natural philosophy. Sherley stated that the reading of Robert Boyle's works had encouraged him to undertake the writing of his 'Essay'. Through Oldenburg, Sherley was acquainted with Boyle, whom he referred to as 'my excellent friend' ('Philosophicall Essay', 84). Sherley's views, as contained in the 'Essay', were a combination of Jean-Baptiste van Helmont's iatrochemistry with Boyle's corpuscular philosophy. Like Helmont and Boyle, Sherley denied that fire analysis could reduce mixed bodies to the first principles, and, like other Helmontians, he searched for the alkahest -- that is, the universal solvent. Sherley, who fully embraced a teleological view of nature, reinterpreted the Helmontian seminal principles to claim that they were particles of matter endowed by God with the power of producing natural bodies. 
In 1675 Sherley was involved in an unsuccessful dispute with Sir John Fagg over the Wiston estate in Sussex, then worth about $3000 a year. Sherley had inherited the estate from his father, but it was granted to Sir Thomas Fagg during the civil war. When the case was decided against him in chancery, Sherley appealed to the House of Lords. As Sir John was a member of the House of Commons, Sherley was ordered into the custody of the serjeant-at-arms on 12 May 1675 for bringing an appeal in the House of Lords against a member of the lower house. The matter occasioned a dispute between the two houses. 
Sherley published the following translations: 'Cochlearia curiosa, or, The Curiosities of Scurvy Grass' (1676) from a work by V. A. Moellenbroek; 'A Treatise of the Gout' (1676) and 'Medicinal Councels' (1677), both after T. Turquet de Mayerne; and 'The Curious Distillatory' (1677), after J. S. Elsholtz. Sherley said the work of translation diverted him from melancholy. He died on 5 August 1678 and was buried in the south-west vault of St Bride's Church, off Fleet Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25377


Sherlock, Martin (b. before 1747, d. 1797), traveller, was a member, it is supposed, of the Kilkenny family of Sherlock. Nothing is known of his family background or of his early years. He was admitted at Trinity College, Dublin, on 1 November 1763, whence he graduated BA in 1768 and MA in 1773. About 1777 Sherlock became chaplain to Frederick Augustus Hervey, fourth earl of Bristol, and bishop of Derry, and under his patronage travelled extensively in Germany, Switzerland, and Italy between 1776 and 1778. The letters he wrote during his travels are dated from The Hague, Berlin, Dresden, Vienna, Rome, Naples, the Alps, and Ferney, where he visited Voltaire in April 1776. Twenty-seven of Sherlock's two hundred letters were published in Geneva and Paris in 1779 and in Neufchatel in 1781 as 'Lettres d'un voyageur anglois'. In the letters from Berlin, Sherlock described the Prussians as the Macedonians of Germany, but Frederick the Great, who read the book, took this in a sense complimentary to himself, and gave Sherlock an interview in Potsdam on 20 July 1779. An English translation by the Revd John Duncombe was published in London in 1780, before Sherlock's return from Europe and before it was known that he was in holy orders. A German version appeared in Leipzig in the same year. A second series of forty-four letters, 'Nouvelles lettres', was published in 1780 in Paris and London, then translated into English by Sherlock (who claimed, in the preface, that he wrote only for fame) and published in London in 1781 as 'New Letters from an English Traveller'. This volume was Sherlock's first work in English and he warned the reader to be patient with his style, which, by now, was affected by writing in Italian and French. The letters contain impressions of Italy, Geneva, Lausanne, Strasbourg, Berlin, Germany, Senlis, and Paris, which he asserts that no traveller ever left without regret of some kind or another. Both volumes were well received in France and in Italy, where reviewers pointed out the originality and impartiality of Sherlock's observations, but had much less success in England than abroad. Sherlock noted the scant success the 'Letters' received in England, even though, he claimed, he was forced to pay 2's'. a book towards a fine binding in order to increase the prospect of their selling. If it had not been for the sale of 600 volumes in France within four weeks, Sherlock claimed, 'these books would have broken my heart' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 8.70). Thomas Carlyle, in the last of his ten-volume 'History of Friedrich II of Prussia', quotes largely from Sherlock's 'Letters' to describe the encounter between Sherlock and Voltaire. About Sherlock's volume, Carlyle comments: the book 'is now little other than a Dance of Will-o'-wisps to us. A book tawdry, incoherent, indistinct, at once flashy and opaque, full of idle and exuberances -- as is the poor man himself' (Carlyle, 10.70). In the same year as the 'Lettres', Sherlock published in Naples, with some assistance from an Italian friend, the 'Consiglio ad un giovane poeta', of which Sherlock gave 400 copies to the bookseller Gregorio Settazi and instructed the marchese di Maccaroni to distribute the money arising from the sale to poor widows. The book was answered by Bassi, professor of Italian and English language in Paris, in 'Observations sur les poetes italiens', Sherlock having compared the tragic poets of Italy with Shakespeare, with little advantage to the former. Bassi defends Dante, Tasso, Ariosto, Petraica, Chiabreta, and Macini against Sherlock's observations. A portion of the 'Consiglio' was translated into French by M. D. R. as 'Fragment sur Shakspeare, tire des conseils a un jeune poete', published in Paris in 1780. An English translation from the French was published in London in 1786. The English translator, the Revd John Duncombe, claimed that Sherlock's digression on Shakespeare in the 'Consiglio' is the only interesting part of the work (hence the 'Fragment'). Another English version of the 'Fragment', translated by John Nichols, was republished, together with the two series of 'Letters', in London in 1802. In 1781 Sherlock wrote a volume of thirty 'Letters on Several Subjects', on subjects including Shakespeare, Richardson, Frederick the Great, Voltaire, 'Mr. Sherlock', wit, genius, taste, judgement, delicacy, the French, and women. His former works had all been dedicated to the earl of Bristol, and this was dedicated to the countess. This volume was followed in a few months by a second, dedicated to the earl of Bristol and containing thirty-nine letters. 
Sherlock hoped, through the influence of the several authorities and courts he had frequented, to obtain a diplomatic post, and he was spoken of in 1781 as secretary to the embassy in Vienna. He was seen during this season in the salons of Mrs Montagu and Lady Lucan; and Horace Walpole, who was acquainted with Sherlock, wrote of him in 1780: 'I am far from guessing why Mr Sherlock does not write in his own language... I should think everybody in this age could write best in his own... Mr Sherlock's Italian is ten times worse than his French, and more bald. He by no means wants parts, but a good deal more judgment. ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 8.158)' Although Sherlock was disappointed in his expectations of a diplomatic career, his merits were, in some degree, rewarded in Ireland, his native country, where he was appointed surrogate to the united dioceses of Killala and Achonry on 9 October 1781, and obtained through his friend Dr Perry, bishop of Killala, the united vicarages of Castlecomer and Kilglass (13 November 1782). In a letter dated 13 June 1781 written in Limerick to a friend in London, Sherlock complained about his living of $200 a year given by the bishop of Killala prior to Sherlock's appointment in 1781. In the letter he asks his friend to put an announcement in four newspapers stating that he was in fact receiving $400 a year. Sherlock believed that making the public know of his income would encourage the sale of his books in England: 'the world is very apt (God bless it) to value a man's writings according to his rank and fortune' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 8.71-2). On 24 March 1788 Sherlock was appointed by John Law (died 1810), his last patron (bishop of Killala from 10 November 1787, and afterwards bishop of Elphin, 27 March 1795), to the rectory and vicarage of Skreen, and on 28 October in the same year he was collated to the archdeaconry of Killala. In Ireland, Sherlock felt cut off from the world and expressed his frustrations in a letter dated 21 January 1782 from Ballina: 'The Booksellers in London 'have given', and to my knowledge 'do give', very considerable annual sums to men of talents to write for them. I think I could write as well as most men who have written in prose within the century. One great advantage I have over almost all of them, not excepting Dean Swift or Dr. Johnson; I mean a superior education. (ibid., 8.75)' Sherlock died in Ireland in 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 25378


Sherlock, Paul (1595-1646), Jesuit and theologian, was born at Waterford on 14 August 1595, the son of Walter Sherlock and Beatrice Leonard. At the age of sixteen he followed his elder brother Patrick to Spain, and entered the Society of Jesus at Salamanca on 30 September 1612. Patrick Sherlock, who had entered the society in 1602, died at Santiago de Compostela in 1614. After studying philosophy at the Jesuit colleges of Valladolid and Santiago, Paul Sherlock was ordained priest at Santiago in 1621. He was preparing to return to Ireland when, in 1624, he was appointed to succeed Thomas White as rector of the Irish College at Santiago, a post which he held until 1628. Subsequently he was rector of the Irish College at Salamanca from 1629 until his death. He was a reluctant rector: both colleges were chronically short of funds, and administration was a burden to him. 
Sherlock's lifelong passion was for patristic and scriptural scholarship, which bore fruit in an extended devotional commentary on the 'Song of Solomon' in three folio volumes, 'Anteloquia in Salomonis Canticum Canticorum', later volumes 'Cogitationes in Salomonis Canticum Canticorum' (Lyons, 1633-40). This magnum opus was reprinted at Venice in 1641, and Sherlock's earnings, together with a generous subsidy from Fernando de Vera, bishop of Cuzco, enabled him to purchase a large library, ownership of which was disputed after his death between the Jesuits of Salamanca and the Irish College. In 1644, under the semi-pseudonym Paulus Leonardus (using his mother's maiden name) and omitting to declare his membership of the Society of Jesus, he published at Lyons 'Responsio ad expostulationes recentium theologorum', a defence of the Molinist doctrine of 'scientia media' against its Dominican critics. Discussion of Molina's attempt to reconcile divine foreknowledge with human free will was at the time officially proscribed by Rome. The work was dedicated to Juan de Palafox, bishop of Puebla and virtual viceroy of Mexico, who was a benefactor of the Irish College. Three years later (1647) Palafox was to become embroiled in a bitter dispute with the Society of Jesus. 
The strains of office and a lifelong regime of austerity and self-mortification undermined Sherlock's health. He died at the Irish College, Salamanca, on 8 August 1646, and was buried at Salamanca. The first volume of his unfinished treatise on the creation, 'Antiquitatum Hebraicarum dioptra', was published posthumously at Lyons in 1651 on the initiative of Luke Wadding, another Waterford man and former rector of the Irish College, Salamanca, to whom the work was dedicated by the publishers. Sherlock's brief manuscript autobiography, relating the principal events of his life up to 1645, was published for the first time in 1917. 


@@@@@


doc= 25379


Sherlock, Richard (1612-1689), Church of England clergyman, was born at Oxton, a township on the Cheshire Wirral on 11 November 1612, and was baptized at the parish church of Woodchurch four days later. He was the third son of John Sherlock (died 1613) and his wife, Cicely, 'nee' Fells, who later married William Wilson and had two other sons, the elder of whom, Nathaniel (1626-1702), was himself father of the bishop of Sodor and Man, Thomas Wilson. Sherlock's mother was determined to give him a good education. A stint at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, when he was aged only fourteen, proved both premature and expensive, and he was transferred to Trinity College, Dublin, where he proceeded MA in 1633. He remained in Ireland as minister of several small parishes until the rebellion of 1641. In September 1643, when the royalist leader the marquess of Ormond made a truce with the confederates and sent over some regiments to help Charles I against the parliamentarian forces, Sherlock returned to England as an army chaplain, but was soon captured in the royalist defeat at Nantwich, Cheshire. When released he returned to Oxford, where he became chaplain of the governor of the royal garrison and then a chaplain of New College, and in 1646, for sermons he had preached at court or before the royalist parliament at Oxford, he was awarded the degree of BD. 
Ejected from the university by the parliamentary visitors about 1648 Sherlock became chaplain to Jasper Mayne in nearby Cassington, where he lodged with the mother of Anthony Wood, the antiquary. When Mayne in turn was ejected Sherlock returned north, in 1652, and became chaplain to Sir Robert Bindloss, a royalist baronet who lived at Borwick Hall, near Lancaster. There he was active on two fronts: reproving his patron for his 'love of company and many of the evils that attend it' (Wilson, xxiv) and engaging in debates with the local Quakers. In 1654 Sherlock published 'The Quakers wilde questions objected against the ministers of the gospel... with brief answers thereunto' and a discourse on the operation of the Holy Spirit. After a reply by Richard Hubberthorne, Sherlock reprinted this work late in 1655 (though the title page says 1656), with two additional discourses on divine revelation and error, and thus incurred the wrath of George Fox (who attacked him in 'The Great Mystery of the Great Whore Unfolded', 1659, 242-3). 
Sherlock was introduced to Charles Stanley, eighth earl of Derby, who made him his chaplain at Latham, and at the Restoration nominated him to Winwick rectory in Lancashire. The earl also placed Sherlock on an eight-man commission to settle all matters ecclesiastical and civil on the Isle of Man. Having done so 'to the entire satisfaction of the lord and people of that island' (Wilson, xxvi), and been awarded a DD by Trinity College, Dublin, Sherlock finally gained full possession of Winwick, one of the richest livings in England, in 1662, and held it to his death there on 20 June 1689. 
Sherlock repaid his patron's generosity by a long ministry of exemplary piety, diligence, and charity that is described fully by two who knew him well, Thomas Wilson (future bishop of Sodor and Man) and Thomas Crane (a friend and local minister). Sherlock's dedication is also revealed in the text of his publications and his will. He was personally very abstemious, fasted regularly, prostrated himself in his private chapel, prayed almost constantly, even in the middle of the night and in company, and daily contemplated death and eternity (leading to his 'Practical Meditations upon the Four Last Things', published posthumously in 1692). For nearly thirty years he was almost perpetually in residence, reading morning and evening prayer daily in church, and constantly preaching 'plain and practical sermons'. He kept at least three curates for the service of the church and chapels in his large parish, so that Winwick 'became a very desirable place for young divines to improve themselves in the work of the ministry' (Wilson, xxvi-xxvii). He was a 'pattern of good works' (Crane, 26), daily ministering to the needy, prisoners, and those in distress. He contributed much to the setting up of a stock of bread and cloth for the poor of his parish, the capital for which was topped up to $300 on his death. His will and inventory show that he had regularly lent sums to the 'miserably poor' with little or no prospect of repayment; he also bequeathed over $100 to the poor of various parishes with which he had been associated, and money to finish the setting up of a free school at Warrington. The only personal item of value listed in the inventory was his library, valued at $64 14's'. 0died He commissioned his own gravestone for Winwick church, describing himself as 'the most unworthy rector of this church', and ordered it to be placed in the chancel where it would be regularly trampled under foot (will and inventory, Lancs. RO, WCW Richard Sherlock 1689). With no wife and children to look to, Sherlock's bequests to individuals were largely spread among his cousins, nephews, brothers-in-law, and steward and their families. 
Two other features struck contemporaries. One was Sherlock's very strict observance of the established church's canons and his insistence on full and decent uniformity in public worship, which were reflected in his 'The Irregularitie of a Private Prayer in a Publick Congregation' (1674) and 'Several Short, but Seasonable Discourses Touching Common and Private Prayer' (1684). The other was his constant campaign to raise the levels of knowledge and commitment of his parishioners through catechizing and handing out free copies of his own publications. 'Principles of Holy Christian Religion' had been written for the Bindloss household in the 1650s and consisted of a paraphrase of the prayer book catechism with extra questions and answers, and prayers. But it proved so useful not only in Winwick but elsewhere too that it sold nineteen editions in England between 1656 and 1699, and was also published in Welsh and in America. 'Mercurius Christianus' (1673) or as it was thereafter called 'The Practical Christian' was designed as its successor for his Winwick parishioners -- the practice to go with the doctrine, explained in plain words that all could understand. Much enlarged in later editions, this work consisted of prayers, meditations, psalms, and hymns, and a treatise on how to examine oneself for sin. To the sixth edition, published in 1713, Thomas Wilson added a life of his mentor, and noted that the impact of the works on Winwick had been visible in the great number of 'constant, devout communicants, as at that time were hardly to be seen in any parish in England' (Wilson, xxvi). 
A portrait of Sherlock, in cap, bands, and gown, holding a copy of his 'Practical Christian' in his right hand, still hangs in Winwick church. An engraving from this was inserted in some copies of this work. 


@@@@@


doc= 25380


Sherlock, Thomas (1677-1761), bishop of London, was born in London on 20 November 1677, the son of William Sherlock (1639/40-1707), subsequently master of the Temple and dean of St Paul's, and his wife, Elizabeth Gardner (died 1715?). He was baptized on 16 December. In 1689, as a King's scholar, Sherlock entered Eton College (where he became known as a strong swimmer). He was admitted pensioner at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in January 1694 and matriculated in 1695. He took the degrees of BA (1698), MA (1701), and DD (1714), and was elected a fellow of St Catharine's in 1698. 
Sherlock was presented to the living of Therfield, Hertfordshire, in 1702. When, in 1705, his father resigned the mastership of the Temple, he succeeded him, following which he became famous as a preacher and only surrendered the position in 1753. His career advanced rapidly thereafter. In 1711 he was appointed chaplain to Queen Anne, and in 1713 a prebendary of St Paul's. From 1714 to 1719 he was master of St Catharine's, Cambridge, and in 1714-15 was vice-chancellor of the university, in which capacity he upheld certain university privileges 'vis-a-vis' the claims of the archdeacon of Ely, Richard Bentley. He now displayed his support for the Hanoverian dynasty. In 'A Sermon Preach'd at the Temple-Church' he told his audience to show 'a cheerful and steddy Obedience to the Prince whom God has set over us' (p. 23). The following year he was selected to preach before the Commons on the thanksgiving for the Jacobite rising's suppression, and argued '[i]f... we have any Concern for the Peace and Happiness of our Country... we must detest this Rebellion, and with sincere Hearts adore the Goodness of God, who hath wrought this Deliverance for us' (T. Sherlock, 'A Sermon Preach'd before the Honourable House of Commons', 18). In November 1715 Sherlock had been made dean of Chichester but he was ambitious for a bishopric. He became bishop of Bangor in 1728 but observed, in a letter to Thomas Gooch, ''Tis a pity the Bprick shou'd only be a bridge to a better' (Carpenter, 27). He was promoted to Salisbury in 1734 and, in 1748, raised to London, the see which he held until his death in 1761. 
By upbringing and conviction Sherlock was a tory. For this reason Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, had no wish to advance him in the church. Sherlock was, however, perfectly willing to work with the royal family. Under George I he cultivated the favour of the prince of Wales and of Princess Caroline; it was therefore natural for the latter to support Sherlock's elevation to Bangor, after her husband's accession, and his subsequent appointment to Salisbury. None the less relations with Queen Caroline cooled after Sherlock's opposition to the 'Quakers Tithe Bill' and, following her death in 1737, his standing at court waned. 
Sherlock took his political duties seriously though, as time went on, his attendance in the Lords declined. In parliament he was occasionally willing to speak on secular as well as religious subjects, and the duke of Newcastle valued his opinions. He supported Sir Robert Walpole's ministry over the pension bill (1731) and the South Sea inquiry (1733). However, he opposed the ecclesiastical courts and mortmain bills, and joined with Gibson in opposing the 'Quakers Tithe Bill' (1736), in respect of which he produced a pamphlet, 'The Country Parson's Plea'. He supported Walpole in the difficult early period of the War of the Austrian Succession, in 1745 he preached against the Jacobite rising, and he entered the debate on the treatment of the highlands following the rising's suppression. He could be forceful in debate. In 1743 he described the 'Spirituous Liquors Bill' as 'the most unchristian Bill that was ever thought of by any government' and therefore concluded: 'I think it incumbent upon me as a christian bishop, to give my testimony against it in the most open and express manner I can' (Cobbett, 'Parl. Hist.', 12, 1743, 1236). 
It was regrettable that Sherlock's elevation to the episcopate came so late in life since, as his remaining years passed, he became increasingly incapable of discharging his duties effectively. He went to Bangor and, except in 1731 and 1734, held ordinations in the cathedral. He also enforced the duty of residence through the consistory court. While bishop of Salisbury he lived in the city during the summer and annually held an ordination -- and in some years two or more ordinations -- at his palace. He conducted a visitation in 1736, of which the 'Old Whig' reported that he 'obliged the Clergy throughout his Diocese to make a competent Provision for their Curates; and not only so, but had strictly enjoin'd the 'Non-Residents', hence forward to see to it that they do 'reside' on their respective Cures' (23 Sept 1736). 
In the 1740s Sherlock's health deteriorated. In the 1750s he became increasingly sick, having suffered 'a very dangerous Illness, from which indeed he recovered, but with almost the total Loss of the Use of his Limbs... [with] soon after his Speech failing him' (Nicolls, 25). In 1754 Edmund Pyle was appalled at his condition, and in 1755 he appeared near death. He ordained until June 1753 but thereafter other bishops had to undertake this duty for him. In 1759 he produced a charge to the London clergy, which was printed and which denounced non-residence. If a living were neglected, 'the People of the Parish, who are religiously disposed, will probably go to the Meeting-house, if there be one near; those who are not religiously disposed, will probably go to the Ale-house' (T. Sherlock, 'A Charge Delivered to the Clergy, at a Visitation Held for the Diocese of London', 36). It caused some controversy since Sherlock himself had been so obvious a pluralist. 
On his promotion to London in 1748, Sherlock became alarmed about the see's oversight of the American colonies. He was, he observed in 1752, 'bishop of a vast country, without power, or influence, or any means of promoting true religion: sequestered from the people over whom I have the care, and must never hope to see' (Taylor, 'Whigs, bishops and America', 337). He suggested that the work should be split among several English bishops but then concluded that the establishment of a resident American episcopate would serve the church's interests more effectively, maintaining that it would be 'the glory of my life, if I c'd be the instrument... of putting the Ch. abroad upon a true and primitive foot' (ibid., 341). He produced his 'Considerations... relating to ecclesiastical government in America' (LPL, Fulham MSS, 4, fol. 273) but, while the bishops wanted the reform, the government proved unwilling to support it in case it engendered religious strife. To Sherlock's dismay the ministers killed it by prevaricating and then letting the matter drop. 
Sherlock was greatly concerned about the social and moral problems of his age. He saw drunkenness as a great social evil, hence his opposition to the 'Spirituous Liquors Bill', which he believed would facilitate excessive drinking. In his 'Letter... on Occasion of the Late Earthquakes' (1750) he denounced idleness and frivolous activities. Wanting moral regeneration, he maintained: 'Blasphemy and horrid Imprecations domineer in our Streets, and poor Wretches are every Hour wantonly and wickedly calling for Damnation on themselves and others, which may be ('tis much to be feared) too near them already. Add to this the Lewdness and Debauchery that prevail amongst the lowest People, which keeps them idle, poor, and miserable. (pp. 7-8)' He also wished to suppress blasphemous or lewd books.Imbued with traditional views Sherlock was a formidable controversialist. At the time of the Bangorian controversy he was chosen as chairman of the lower house of convocation's committee to report on Bishop Benjamin Hoadly's sermon, and he entered into the pamphlet war on the issues. In 1718 he produced his 'Vindication of the Corporation and Test Acts', which defended the established church's privileges. He was deeply disturbed by the growth of non-traditional and deist ideas; in two of his books, 'The Use and Intent of Prophecy' (1725) and 'The Tryal of the Witnesses of the Resurrection of Jesus' (1729), he countered such positions, arguing the traditional case with great clarity. The former work discussed the 'Old Testament' prophecies relating to Christ, and adopted a liberal, rather than a literal, interpretation. And in 'The Tryal', by using conventional and accepted methods of cross-examination and historical investigation, Sherlock sought to prove the veracity of the scriptural accounts of Christ's resurrection. 'His Zeal was warm and fervent in explaining the great Doctrines and Duties of Christianity, and in maintaining and establishing it upon the most solid and sure Foundations', Samuel Nicolls stated in his memorial sermon. 'Witness those Discourses written purposely in Defence of Christianity, in which the Argument for the Truth of the Christian Religion is carried to its utmost Height' (Nicolls, 28-9). Sherlock's 'Letter... on Occasion of the Late Earthquakes' sold in prodigious numbers. In addition many of his sermons and the discourses that he preached at the Temple Church were published. 
Sherlock married Judith Fountayne, of a Yorkshire family, in 1707; she survived him and died in 1764. They had no children. According to Samuel Nicolls, '[n]o Man was ever more happy in domestic Life, and no one could shew greater Gentleness, Good-nature and Affection to all around him' (Nicolls, 30-31), though it was also noted, in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1773, that '[h]e could bear no opposition in his own house' (p. 385). His portrait at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, shows a man of elegant appearance, intelligent and commanding, with astute eyes and delicate fingers. In later prints his appearance is solemn, his face full. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' observed: '[h]is aspect was rather austere, heavy, and forbidding; but, when he was pleased and smiled, he shewed the most amiable change of features' (ibid.). As for his voice: '[though it] was not melodious, but accompanied rather with a Thickness of Speech, yet were his Words uttered with so much Propriety, and with such Strength and Vehemence, that he never failed to take Possession of his whole Audience, and secure their Attention. (Nicolls, 22)' His later life was dogged by gout and mounting ill health; on this account he declined the see of York and that of Canterbury, in 1743 and 1747 respectively. He died on 18 July 1761 and was buried in Fulham churchyard. He left most of his fortune of $140,000 to his wife and to his nephew Sir Thomas Gooch, and his library to St Catharine's, Cambridge. 
Sherlock owed his advancement to his personal abilities, his steadfast religious convictions, his connections, and his shrewd and flexible political behaviour. It is revealing that, in the age of the whig supremacy, the Church of England, backed by the political establishment, could accommodate in its highest echelons a man with both a tory political outlook and high clerical views. 


@@@@@


doc= 25381


Sherlock, William (1639/40-1707), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in Gravel Lane, Southwark, London, the son of a tradesman. He was educated at St Mary Overie, Southwark, and from about 1653 at Eton College, and was admitted to Peterhouse, Cambridge, as a pensioner under William Falkner on 19 May 1657, aged seventeen. He was elected scholar in 1658, graduated BA in 1660, and MA in 1663. Sherlock spent some years without a steady position in the church, and, if later allegations by Robert South were true, may have been a dissenting preacher, but on 3 August 1669 he was collated as rector of St George's, Botolph Lane, London. This position enabled him to marry Elizabeth Gardner (died 1715?) on 8 February 1673, at the Charterhouse Chapel; her father, whose first name may have been William, lived in the parish of St Andrew Undershaft, London. 
Sherlock's first publication, 'The Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and Union with Him' (1674) was aimed at the Independent divine John Owen, who asserted that God's mercy could be known only through Christ. Sherlock's ridicule of this position brought a reply from Owen in which he was supported by several other dissenters, including Thomas Danson, Edward Polhil, and Vincent Alsop. Sherlock answered in 'A Defence and Continuation of the Discourse' (1675). This controversy, in which Sherlock's position was attacked by some dissenters as moralist, gave expression to the theological differences between dissenters and Anglicans, although many Anglicans held Calvinist opinions and many dissenters were moralist. One counter-attack was Robert Ferguson's 'The Interest of Reason in Religion' (1675) to which Sherlock and Joseph Glanvill, another of Ferguson's targets, replied in 'An Account of Mr Ferguson his Common-Place-Book' (1675), ignoring Ferguson's arguments but charging him with extensive plagiarism of Glanvill and other authors. Sherlock attacked Owen again in the anonymous 'A Discourse about Church Unity' (1681). 'The Case of Resistance to the Supreme Powers' (1684) defended the doctrine of passive obedience. In 1684 he also edited and published William Falkner's 'Two Treatises' with his own dedication to the archbishop of Canterbury, William Sancroft. 
Sherlock's controversial works accompanied his steady rise in London's clerical world. He became the fourth assistant at Sion College in 1673, rising to second assistant the following year. He was senior dean at Sion in 1680 and served a one-year term as president in 1683. Sherlock received his DD in 1680 and the prebend of St Pancras at St Paul's Cathedral on 3 November 1681. He also received a lecturership at St Dunstan's and in 1685 he became master of the Temple in succession to Richard Ball, with the use of a house and an annual salary of $100 from the Inner Temple, $70 in lieu of chambers from the Middle Temple, and $37 6's'. 8died from the crown. 
Sherlock was a leader among the brilliant group of London divines including Thomas Tenison, William Clagett, and Simon Patrick who carried on the literary defence of the Church of England against Catholicism from late in the reign of Charles II into that of James II. Sherlock's 'Protestant Resolution of Faith', first published in 1683, was republished in 1685, 1686, and 1687, at the height of the struggle under James. Sherlock's concern over James's Catholicism was voiced early in the reign, in a sermon preached before the House of Commons on 29 May 1685, the anniversary of the restoration of the monarchy in 1660. Sherlock attacked Catholicism as tending to disloyalty, while asserting his faith in James personally. The Commons voted Sherlock their thanks and ordered the sermon published. It went through two editions in 1685. In 1686 he was appointed a chaplain to James II. 
Sherlock was a prolific author of anti-Catholic publications in James's reign. Of these, the two-part 'A Preservative Against Popery' (1688) provided simple versions of the main protestant arguments, enabling ordinary protestants without theological training to defend themselves against Catholic claims. It went through several editions and provoked a response from the Jesuit polemicist Lewis Sabran, 'An Answer to Dr Sherlock's Preservative against Popery' (1688). Sherlock replied in 'A Vindication of the Preservative' (1688). Several of Sherlock's anti-Catholic writings became part of the canon of eighteenth-century anti-Catholicism by their inclusion in Edmund Gibson's collection, 'Preservative Against Popery'. Sherlock, like most of his allies, continued to uphold the doctrine of passive obedience, but refused to read the declaration of indulgence in 1687, by which James granted freedom of worship to non-Anglican Christians. Sherlock feared losing his lucrative position at the Temple and asked the nonconformist minister John Howe what Howe would do if he were offered the position. He was reassured to hear that Howe would take it, but resign the emoluments to Sherlock. Sherlock's house was the meeting place for some bishops and London clergy on 11 May 1688, where they considered responses to the declaration. 
Sherlock's conduct following the revolution of 1688 was disastrous to his reputation, if not his career. At first he took a very high-church line, opposing compromises with the dissenters for a more comprehensive church and publishing 'A Letter to a Member of the convention' (1689), which called for James's recall upon conditions. A meeting of the clergy at Ely House on 21 January 1689 saw an argument between Sherlock and William of Orange's leading clerical supporter, Gilbert Burnet. (Burnet had earlier included Sherlock in a list of ten Church of England clergy which he recommended to William.) After some hesitation Sherlock refused to take the oaths to William and Mary, and was reckoned a leading nonjuror. He attempted to persuade others to follow his example, with some success. When the day arrived for the suspension of nonjurors, 1 August 1689, he did not preach. 
On 2 February 1690, the day after the day fixed for deprivation, Sherlock stunned ecclesiastical London by preaching at St Dunstan's and praying for William and Mary as 'de facto' sovereigns. At this time he was still not intending to take the oaths. Sherlock was deprived of his position at the Temple, and paid for preachers there out of his own pocket. Shortly after his prayer for the king and queen Sherlock's continuing opposition to the oaths led to a break with Robert South, with whom he had gone over the arguments for and against swearing. In a letter addressed to South on 17 February 1690 Sherlock attacked South for circulating a paper which Sherlock had written supporting taking the oaths, and also ridiculed South's own arguments for taking them. South wrote a scorching reply, breaking off friendly relations. 
By the spring Sherlock began withdrawing from his opposition to the oaths, and he took them that August. Sherlock claimed that he had been convinced by canon 28 in the convocation book of John Overall, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield and of Norwich in the reign of James I, which had been published the previous month. This canon endorsed praying for 'de facto' sovereigns. Sherlock's claim, made in the preface to his defence of his action, 'The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers' (dated 1691, but actually published late in 1690) convinced few, although the book was extremely popular, going through six editions. Sherlock's yielding was widely credited to his belief that the Stuart cause was irretrievable after the battle of the Boyne in July, or to the influence of his wife. Elizabeth Sherlock was nearly as much reviled as her husband, being compared to Xanthippe, the shrewish wife of Socrates, and Eve who tempted Adam. Whatever Sherlock's motivations, his career did not seem to suffer. He was restored as master of the Temple, where he remained until 1705, and on 15 June 1691 he was installed as dean of St Paul's, in succession to John Tillotson. The Temple reimbursed him for the expense of the preachers he had hired in his period of deprivation. He also became a chaplain to the king and queen in 1691. 
Sherlock's argument for 'de facto' obedience, made in 'The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers', exposed him to attack from both the nonjurors, who regarded him as a traitor and timeserver, and the whigs, who found his acceptance of William and Mary grudging at best. Whigs also believed that Sherlock's identification of the right of William and Mary as exclusively 'de facto' meant that the liberties of Englishmen were now without legal foundation. One of the most effective among many nonjuring replies was John Kettlewell's anonymous 'The duty of allegiance settled upon its true grounds, in answer to a late book of Dr Will. Sherlock, entituled 'The case of the allegiance due to sovereign powers'' (1691), while the Revd Samuel Johnson, a whig, published 'Remarks upon Dr Sherlock's Book, Intituled, 'The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers'' (1690). Sherlock responded to his nonjuring opponents in 'The Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, Further Consider'd, and Defended' (1691). 
Sherlock's most frequently reprinted books were not his controversial works but works of religious exposition addressed to a broad Christian audience. During his brief nonjuring period Sherlock published what would be the most frequently reprinted of all his books, 'A Practical Discourse Concerning Death' (1689), originally intended as a series of sermons to be given at the Temple, but which Sherlock was unable to preach before he was deprived. It became one of the most popular religious books of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and in addition to many subsequent editions, was published in a Welsh translation by Thomas Williams in 1691 and an anonymous French translation in 1693. The 'Practical Discourse' argued that, as human beings were naturally motivated towards pleasure, the superiority of the Christian life could be proved in these terms. The spiritual existence of the human soul was infinitely longer than that of the body, and the pains and pleasures of the soul were correspondingly larger than those which could be experienced by the flesh. Consequently the expectation of pleasure could act as an incentive towards a religious existence on earth. 'A Practical Discourse Concerning a Future Judgement' received two editions in 1692, and was also reprinted on several occasions. It was followed in 1694 by 'A Discourse Concerning the Divine Providence' and in 1704 by 'A Discourse Concerning the Happiness of Good Men'. 
Sherlock entered another important theological controversy in 1690, that over Socinianism, the denial of the divine nature of Jesus Christ. Sherlock had been working on trinitarian issues for some time, and intended his 'Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever Blessed Trinity' (1690) to be a major contribution. He put forth a new interpretation of the Trinity as three persons united by a mutual consciousness. Sherlock was one of the first English thinkers to use extensively the concept of consciousness, in which he may have been influenced by John Turner's 'A Discourse Concerning the Messias' (1685). But trinitarian issues were always fraught with danger, and some thought that the vigour of Sherlock's attack on Socinianism had brought him to the opposite error of tritheism, the making of the Trinity into three separate gods. Among those was South, who now saw an opportunity to express his scorn of Sherlock. South's anonymous 'Animadversions on Dr Sherlock's Book' (1693) was crushing. Sherlock replied with the anonymous 'Defence of Dr Sherlock's Notion' (1694), which South answered in 'Tritheism Charged upon Dr Sherlock's Notion' (1695). Other leading English theologians and philosophers involved in the controversy were John Wallis, Richard Burthogge, Edward Stillingfleet, and Francis Gastrell. On the continent Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz spoke of Sherlock with great respect, and deplored the harshness of South's attack, while agreeing that Sherlock had come very close to tritheism. 
Whatever the merits of his case Sherlock got the worst of the dispute. Joseph Bingham's Oxford sermon following Sherlock on the Trinity provoked condemnation of its doctrine by the hebdomadal council as 'false, impious and heretical' on 25 November 1695. Sherlock responded with 'A Modest Examination of the Authority and Reasons of the Late Decree' (1696), but the controversy ended after William III, prompted by Thomas Tenison, then archbishop of Canterbury, gave directions, addressed to the Church of England hierarchy, forbidding the use of new terms relating to the Trinity on 3 February 1696. Sherlock's sermon 'The Danger of Corrupting the Faith by Philosophy', preached before the lord mayor and aldermen of London on 25 April 1697, and his 'The Present State of the Socinian Controversy' (1698) mark his retreat. 
In 1698 Sherlock was appointed rector of Therfield, Hertfordshire, in succession to William Holder. The living was in the gift of the dean and chapter of St Paul's. Much of his later career was devoted to advancing his eldest son Thomas Sherlock (1677-1761), who succeeded his father as rector of Therfield in 1702 and as master of the Temple in 1705. A younger son, John, entered the law, being admitted to the bar at the Inner Temple on 2 July 1704. Mary Sherlock, one of Sherlock's two daughters, married Dr Thomas Gooch ['see 'Gooch, Sir Thomas, second baronet], the future bishop of Ely, in 1717. William Sherlock continued to defend publicly what he regarded as Church of England orthodoxy. 'The New Danger of Presbytery' (1703), a reply to Charles Trimnell's 'A Vindication of the Proceedings of some Members of the Lower House of the Last Convocation', attacked high-church zealotry, while 'The Scripture Proofs of our Saviour's Divinity' (1706) rebutted Bishop Edward Fowler's 'A Discourse of the Descent of the Man-Christ Jesus from Heaven' (1706). Neither had the success of Sherlock's earlier writings or was reprinted. Sherlock's collected sermons, first published in 1700 as 'Sermons Preach'd on Several Occasions', were issued three times in the eighteenth century, and translated into German in 1744. William Sherlock died at Hampstead, Middlesex, on 19 June 1707, and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 25382


Sherlock, William (c.1738-1806), portrait painter and engraver, is said to have been born in Dublin, the son of a fencing master and prize-fighter. In 1759 he was a student in the St Martin's Lane Academy in London, also obtaining a premium from the Society of Arts for figure drawing in the same year and a second in 1760 for engraving. He studied engraving with J. P. Le Bas in Paris in 1761. While there he engraved a large plate of 'The Grange', after J. Pillement, published in 1761. He also engraved the portrait heads for T. G. Smollett's 'A Complete History of England' (4 vols., 1757-8; 11 vols., 1758-60). From 1764 Sherlock began exhibiting small portraits, in both oil and watercolours, and miniatures. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Artists in 1771, and became one of their directors in 1773, exhibiting with them until 1780. On 5 October 1775 he married Frances Welker at the Old Church, St Pancras, London. Between 1796 and 1806 he exhibited twenty-five paintings at the Royal Academy. A self-portrait in miniature by Sherlock of 180(5) was sold at Christies (12 July 1988, lot 206, repr.). His 'Portrait of Sawrey Gilpin' is in the National Portrait Gallery, and three of his miniatures are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Joseph Farington noted in his diary on 21 February 1799 that 'Sherlock quite broke down sold out of funds' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1162). He also recorded being informed of Sherlock's death in London in an entry on 14 December 1806 (ibid., 8.2926). From 1813 to 1821 Farington administered Royal Academy donations to a 'Mrs Sherlock'. 
Sherlock's son 


@@@@@


doc= 25383


William Pengree Sherlock (b. 1775) was baptized on 20 August 1776 at St Marylebone, Marylebone Road, Middlesex. He also practised as an artist. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 31 December 1794, aged nineteen, and then exhibited there from 1801 to 1810, sending a few portraits, but principally watercolour landscapes. He drew most of the illustrations to W. Dickinson's 'Antiquities historical, architectural, chorographical, and itinerary, in Nottinghamshire and the adjacent counties' (1801-3), and also painted the miniature of the author from which the frontispiece to the work was engraved. In 1811 and following years he published a series of soft ground-etchings after his own watercolour drawings, and those of David Cox, S. Prout, and T. Girtin, among others. A series of drawings in watercolour, representing views in the immediate neighbourhood of London, is in the British Museum. Joseph Farington records Sherlock's unsuccessful application for the post of drawing master at the Royal Military Academy in 1808 (Farington, 'Diary', 9.3302). 


@@@@@


doc= 25384


Sherman, Edward (1776-1866), coach proprietor, was the son of Edward Staniford Sherman and his wife, Mary, and was born in Berkshire and baptized at South Moreton, near Wallingford, Berkshire, on 16 January 1777. It was later recorded that he went to London on foot in 1793, being too poor to pay the fare, and obtained employment at 12's'. a week. It has been claimed that he owed his advancement either to success as a stockbroker, or to friendship with Lewis Levy, the great toll lessee and stockbroker, but this rests entirely on later evidence, particularly the fact that Sherman later 'dealt largely' in stocks ('City Press', 29 Sept 1866, 5). 
More credibly, it was stated in 1907 that Sherman married three old and wealthy ladies in succession; the widow who owned the Oxford Arms inn, Warwick Lane, London, followed by her sister, and then the sister's niece. It is certainly the case that, at St Martin Ludgate on 6 August 1803, Sherman, then a bachelor of the parish of St Luke Middlesex, married Ann Palmer, a widow, and on 5 October 1803 he became a member of the Innholders' Company in respect of the Oxford Arms inn, Warwick Lane. However, no subsequent marriage can be traced until 1849, and the date of Ann Sherman's death is unknown. 
Sherman's move to the Bull and Mouth, Aldersgate Street, about 1823, brought him to the forefront of the coach trade. By the 1830s his coach business was the third largest in London, with 700 horses at its peak. In 1836 he had sixty-one coaches, including ten mail coaches, leaving London every day. Sherman himself was never seen driving a coach, and was later described as 'not a horsey man' (Harper, 1.37). He originated the long-distance day coaches; in particular, the Wonder to Shrewsbury, performing the 158 mile journey in fifteen and three-quarter hours, set a new standard in 1825. It was followed by the Telegraph to Manchester in 1833 (186 miles in eighteen and a half hours). His coaches had distinctive yellow wheels and bodies, and, unusually, he owned some himself instead of hiring them. He rebuilt the Bull and Mouth (as the Queen's Hotel) in 1830, with extensive underground stabling. He was also a promoter, and then a director, of the 'Thames', the first steam packet plying between London and Margate in 1814. 
Harper, writing in 1907, stated that: 'Without doubt a man of strong character, he had many peculiarities, among them a decided taste for extravagance in dress and jewellery, remarkable even at that time... instead of sporting a shirt front, his chest displayed an expanse of black satin, plentifully covered with diamond pins. (Harper, 1.43-4)' Sherman was apparently unpopular with his country partners, who had difficulty obtaining their share of the earnings from him. 
Sherman was the slowest of the great coach proprietors to adapt to the railways. When the Grand Junction Railway opened in 1838 he kept some of his coaches working along its route, not only losing heavily on them, but also forfeiting the opportunity to become one of the railway's agents. However, this does not seem to have diminished his prosperity significantly. Certainly by 1839 he was aware that, where railways existed, only the poor or the timid would travel by coach, and the number of people too timid to use railways was rapidly declining. He later worked omnibuses between Paddington and Bank, and he remained the proprietor of the Queen's Hotel. He was said to have been a shareholder in some of the earliest railways. 
Sherman's last wife was Isabella, daughter of Thomas Hunt, whom he married at Christ Church, London, on 14 October 1849. She survived him. No children are recorded in Sherman's will, although he was reputed to have illegitimate children. According to Harper, his family took advantage of his eccentricities to commit him, without reasonable cause, to Bethlem Hospital. He died at an asylum in Chiswick known as the Manor House, on 14 September 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 25385


Sherman, James (1796-1862), Congregational minister, son of an employee of the East India Company and his Yorkshire wife, was born in Banner Street, Finsbury, London, on 21 February 1796. After education by two local dissenting ministers he was apprenticed to an ivory turner for three and a half years. When convinced of a call to the ministry he applied to the Countess of Huntingdon's College at Cheshunt, and was accepted in November 1815. Three years later he was ordained to the Christian ministry in Sion Chapel, Whitechapel, London, before supplying consecutively three chapels of the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion, in Plymouth, Bath, and Bristol. In 1821 he began a ministry lasting fifteen years at Castle Street Church, Reading, a secession from St Giles's Anglican church, one of whose vicars had supported the countess of Huntingdon. On 10 January 1822 he married a daughter of Dr Grant of Bristol, with whom he had a daughter and a son. She died on 1 January 1834. While at Reading he became friendly with the Revd Rowland Hill, an earlier associate of the countess of Huntingdon, for whom the independent Surrey Chapel had been built in St George's Fields, Blackfriars Road, London, and occasionally preached there. When Hill died in 1833 the congregation sent an invitation to Sherman, knowing this to be Hill's own wish. At first Sherman refused, but finally accepted in 1836. As the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion was closely linked with the Congregationalists, it was not unexpected for both church and minister now to associate with them. 
At the Surrey Chapel Sherman exercised a notable ministry, for many years in partnership with his second wife, 
In 1854 James Sherman resigned from the Surrey Chapel and accepted the pastorate of a new Congregational church in Blackheath, London, established by the London Chapel Building Society. His ministry at Blackheath again drew large numbers; 468 new members were admitted, and congregations of 1000 were common. But after much ill health he died on 15 February 1862 at 12 Paragon, Blackheath, and was buried at Abney Park cemetery on 22 February. He had continued to support Cheshunt College throughout his life, and after his death his friends contributed to a Cheshunt bursary in his memory. 
Sherman's published works included 'A Guide to Acquaintance with God' (1826) and 'A Plea for the Lord's Day' (1830), both of which reached many editions, and a volume entitled 'Psalms and Hymns for the Use of Surrey Chapel' (1841). He also published several sermons, and memoirs of Rowland Hill and William Allen. 


@@@@@


doc= 25386


Sherman, John (d. 1671), historian and Church of England clergyman, was the son of Samuel Sherman (died 1644), clothier, of Dedham, Essex, and his wife, Esther (died 1646), daughter of Robert Burgess. Sherman's early life is obscure, but in 1645 he was admitted as a pensioner at Queens' College, Cambridge, and he matriculated in 1647. He graduated BA in 1649-50. He subscribed to the engagement, was elected unanimously a fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1650, and proceeded MA in 1653. He was incorporated at Oxford the same year. 
Two years later, in 1655, Sherman was appointed rector of Graveley, Cambridgeshire. He was university proctor in 1660-61, and the following year the university presented him to Wilmsloe in the diocese of Chester, but he was never instituted because the former incumbent retained the living through the 'Act of Indemnity'. In 1662 Sherman became rector of Harlton, Cambridgeshire. He wrote 'Historia Collegii Jesu Cantabrigiae', recording the histories of the nunnery of St Rhadegund and the college which replaced it from their foundations to Edmund Boldero's mastership (1663-79). Sherman's work is considered diligently researched and fairly reliable, although his royalism distorted his analysis of his own times. J. O. Halliwell printed an inaccurate version in 1840. 
In 1663 Sherman was one of the syndics for restoring Lambeth's library, and in 1664 he was one of the twelve university preachers. He also contributed to the marble paving in Jesus College chapel. In 1665 he was admitted DD by royal mandate. A John Sherman was married on 2 November 1666 to Elizabeth Clare at Graveley. Sherman was appointed prebend and archdeacon of Sarum in 1670, died in London on 27 March 1671, and was buried in the chancel of Jesus College chapel. His will was proved on 29 March 1671 by his brother Edmund. 
Sherman should not be confused with his namesake John Sherman DD, a graduate of Trinity College, Cambridge, and author of several religious tracts, who died, probably in Norwich, in 1663. 


@@@@@


doc= 25387


Sherring, Matthew Atmore (1826-1880), missionary in India, was born in Halstead, Essex, on 26 September 1826, eldest of the four sons of John Sherring, manufacturer and deacon of the Old Independent Meeting. Initially articled to a surgeon in Colchester, Sherring went on to London University, attending both Coward College (Congregationalist) and University College; he graduated BA in 1848, LLB in 1849, and MA in 1850. A youthful resolve to offer himself to Christ's service was strengthened by the early deaths of two brothers and his father, and he was ordained by the London Missionary Society (LMS) at King's Weigh House Chapel on 7 December 1852. Afterwards he sailed for India to take charge of the LMS mission at Benares. On 5 March 1856 he married Margaret, daughter of Robert Cotton Mather, his colleague at Mirzapur, and eight months later he took charge at Mirzapur while Mather returned to Britain on furlough. Mirzapur remained relatively quiet during the 1857 rebellion and by the time the fighting was over Sherring had put together an account, entitled 'The Indian Church during the Great Rebellion', which his father-in-law published in London in 1859. On Mather's return in February 1861 Sherring and his wife went back to their duties at Benares. 
Sherring had no illusions about the uphill task facing missionaries in Benares, the most sacred of Hindu cities. His reports home pleaded for understanding of the peculiar difficulties of evangelization in Benares and promoted 'indirect' results, meaning his well-publicized debates with Hindu pandits and his work in fostering the popular mission school. He was fascinated by Hindu society and wrote several books which, though denouncing Hinduism, were novel in both insight and detail; they included 'The Sacred City of the Hindus' (1868) and his 'magnum opus', the three-volume 'Hindu Tribes and Castes' (1872-81). Predictably enough, Sherring viewed India's pre-British past as stagnant non-history -- an absence of progress which he blamed on the inhibiting nature of caste -- but he was nevertheless a sufficiently dispassionate observer for cautious historians to be able still to make use of his books. 
Sherring's more conventional publications included: 'The History of Protestant Missions in India' (1875) and 'The Life and Labours of the Rev. William Smith' (1879). He had two lengthy trips home in 1866-9 and 1876-8 but was unable to arrest a decline in health. He died of cholera at Benares on 10 August 1880 and was buried there on the same day. He was survived by his widow, who was widely recognized as an equal partner in his evangelical and academic work, and their five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 25388


John Sherey (d. 1551), appointed archdeacon of Lewes, Sussex, in 1542, and precentor of St Paul's Cathedral, London, in 1543. John enjoyed the favour of Thomas Howard, duke of Norfolk, who presented him to the precentorship and to the rectory of Thackham, Sussex, which Sherey was holding in 1545. In that year he is also described as the duke's chaplain. Sherey held other benefices in the 1540s, including the rectory of Hayling, Hampshire, and the vicarages of Horsham and Worth, Sussex. His will, made on 1 August 1551, gave bequests to his poor parishioners, divided his books among three Sussex clergy, and left the majority of his lands and chattels to members of his family (among whom Richard Sherrey is not mentioned); he had died, unmarried, by 22 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 25389


Sherrey, Richard (b. c.1505), schoolmaster and author, was born in London diocese about 1505 and admitted as a demy (undergraduate scholar) of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1522. He graduated as a BA in 1528 and as MA in 1531. From Magdalen he went to Cardinal College, Oxford, founded by Magdalen's alumnus Cardinal Wolsey, where in 1530 he occurs as a minor canon and teacher of grammar to the choristers. He returned to Magdalen, between Michaelmas 1531 and January 1532, as master of the college school, where he remained until Michaelmas 1540. In 1532 he also held a fellowship at University College and was ordained as an exorcist, but it is not clear if he proceeded to major holy orders. On leaving Magdalen College School, Sherrey appears to have moved to London, very probably to another teaching post since his four known published works include two contributions to the study of grammar. His 'Treatise of Schemes and Tropes Gathered out of the Best Grammarians and Orators' (1550) provided a systematic review of figures of speech -- the first of its kind in English -- as well as a translation of Erasmus's work 'De civilitate morum puerilium', with an introduction dated at London. 'A Very Fruitful Exposition upon the Sixth Chapter of St John', translated from a work by Johann Brentz the elder, appeared in the same year and describes Sherrey as a Londoner. 'A Treatise of the Figures of Grammar and Rhetoric' was published in 1555, and he also published a translation, no longer extant or datable, of 'S. Basil the Great his Letter to Gregory Nazianzen', 'shewing that many 100. years ago, certaine godly men began and used the life commonly called monasticall' (Ames, 1.677). 'Schemes and Tropes' was addressed to Master Thomas Brooke esquire, probably the protestant activist of that name, and the work by Brentz to Lord Wentworth, a supporter of the earl of Warwick. These might suggest that Sherrey had protestant leanings, but the 'Figures of Grammar' was dedicated to Sir William Paget, a supporter of Mary Tudor, and the translation of 'Basil' looks like a work aimed at Catholics. It may be that the works were undertaken largely to earn money, or to attract the patronage of influential people of the day. Nothing is known of his death. 
Sherrey shared a surname and London affiliation with 


@@@@@


doc= 25390


Sherwen, John (bap. 1748, d. 1826), surgeon and apothecary, son of John Sherwen, was baptized at St Michael's, Workington, Cumberland, on 23 April 1748. He was apprenticed to Anthony Harrison, surgeon and apothecary of Penrith, for five years, and then admitted a pupil at St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 4 February 1769. The court of examiners of the London Company of Surgeons passed him as a surgeon to an Indiaman on 1 June, four months later, and by the end of the year Sherwen was at Acheen, Sumatra, the voyage from Falmouth having taken five months; he was afterwards at Calcutta and in the Bay of Bengal. 
By 1774 Sherwen had returned to England and was practising with Thomas Prichard, at Enfield, Middlesex; ten years later he took over Prichard's practice. He was also friendly there with Richard Gough, and Isaac D'Israeli, the three forming a literary trio. Sherwen founded the short-lived 'Medical Spectator' and contributed to medical journals, and a silver medal for his contributions was given him by the Medical Society of London in March 1788. 
Sherwen was admitted MD of King's College, Aberdeen, on 14 February 1798, on the recommendation of William Saunders; and on 4 May 1802 he became an extra-licentiate of the College of Physicians in London. In 1802 he paid a visit to Paris. His first wife was Douglass, posthumous daughter of Duncan Campbell of Salt Spring, Jamaica. She visited Bath for her health, and died there on 16 June 1804. A monument to her memory was erected in Bath Abbey. In 1805 Sherwen settled into practice at Bath, living at 18 Great Stanhope Street. He married again at Birkenhead, his second wife being Lydia Ann (1773-1851), the daughter of the late Revd Dannett of Liverpool, on 12 November 1807. There were no children by either of Sherwen's marriages. 
Sherwen made a patient study of early English writers, and he owned some rare volumes of Elizabethan literature and early herbals. From 1808 to 1813 he was a frequent contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', mainly on the authenticity of the 'Rowley' poems, which he believed to be genuine. He assisted John Britton in his work on Bath Abbey, and Britton dedicated to him the view of the abbey church from the south side. In 1809 Sherwen published his 'Introduction to an examination of some part of the internal evidence respecting the antiquity and authenticity of certain publications' by Rowley or Chatterton. Sherwen was also a versifier of some merit, writing satirically of pompous squires, members of the local vestry, and Calvinist ministers (Gough MSS). He trained a number of apprentices, including William Gaitskel, who later became important in medical politics. 
Sherwen made frequent trips to Enfield and died there in his house in Baker Street on 3 October 1826. He was buried on 12 October at St Andrew's Church, Enfield. After taking care of his wife's needs, his estate, including an annuity and the house at Bath, passed in succession to his dead sister's children, and then to establish a dispensary in Workington or Lamplugh. 


