@@@@@


doc= 25391


Charles Sherwin (bap. 1757) was baptized on 14 February 1757; he was John Sherwin's brother and worked as his assistant. He completed his brother's portrait of Captain Dampier, after Murray, and those of Viscount Folkestone, after Gainsborough, and George Cleghorne MD. His own work had no special merit and consisted of portraits for books. It is not known when or where he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 25392


Sherwin, John Keyse (bap. 1751, d. 1790), designer and engraver, was baptized on 27 May 1751 at East Dean, near Chichester, Sussex, one of nine children born to Francis Sherwin, a shipyard carpenter's labourer, and his wife Martha Nowell. Sherwin anticipated the 'ploughman poet' Robert Burns and the 'Cornish wonder' John Opie in being catapulted into society from humble circumstances and feted as a genius. He was working as a gardener on William Mitford's estate near Petworth in 1769 when Mitford discovered his talent and sent his drawing 'The Head of a Blackmoor' to the Society of Arts, where it was awarded a silver medal. Sherwin was then enabled to go to London, where he studied painting under the affluent showman John Astley, who had married into society and bought Schomberg House, to which fashionable ladies flocked. Sherwin was taught to engrave by the celebrated royal favourite Francis Bartolozzi, whose bohemian lifestyle exerted an equally malign influence on the impressionable prodigy. In 1770 he was admitted to the schools of the Royal Academy, and in 1772 gained the gold medal for a historical picture. 
According to the contemporary artist Edward Dayes his training left Sherwin full of 'impudent assurance' ('Works', 349). On leaving Bartolozzi in 1774 he set up on his own, his first published plate being 'The Madonna' (1775), after Sassoferrato. He exhibited ambitious red-and-black chalk drawings of historical subjects over the next ten years and was appointed 'engraver in the red chalk manner' to George III. He engraved some fine portraits and subjects after Sir Joshua Reynolds, Angelica Kauffman, Thomas Gainsborough, and others and he was undoubtedly talented and skilful. He was chiefly celebrated in his own day for such 'history prints' as his fine altar pieces after Guido Reni at Magdalen College, Oxford, and after Anton Raphael Mengs at All Souls; 'The Fortune Teller', after Reynolds; and 'The Death of Lord Robert Manners', after Thomas Stothard (for which last Thomas Macklin paid him $700). His style in line engraving was distinctively metallic and flashy, tending to stylization and full of bravado. In 1785, on Woollett's death, he became historical engraver to the king. He also began to engrave and publish a series of his own designs, but he lacked a talent for composition: 'The Happy Village' and 'The Deserted Village' (1787) were ill-conceived and their fashionable mixed-method technique was muddy in effect. Another historical print, 'The Finding of Moses' (1789), was a transparently commercial device for grouping portraits of the leading society ladies with the princess royal starring as Pharaoh's daughter. Fashionable ladies flocked to his house, vying for inclusion. He charged a bold 3 guineas for the print, with early impressions costing double that. His oil 'The Installation Dinner at the Institution of the Order of St Patrick in 1783' -- some 50 or 60 feet long -- was left unfinished at his death, as was his engraving of it. 
Such projects tended to justify Dayes's caustic observation that Sherwin's 'vanity was so great that he imagined nothing too difficult' ('Works', 349), and it was probably these ambitious publishing schemes that ultimately broke him. According to Dodd, Sherwin, 'realizing by his labours considerable affluence... launched into an imprudent course of life by which he destroyed his constitution and met with a premature death... at the age of 37' (Dodd, fol. 232). The unsympathetic Dayes did not mince his words: 'by running from one excess to another, he broke a good constitution, impaired his mind, and so embarrassed his affairs, that he was afraid to appear abroad: under these wretched circumstances he sank into eternity, at the house of Wilkinson, the print-seller in Cornhill. ('Works', 349)' Sherwin died at a small alehouse in Oxford Road, Westminster, on 20 September 1790. A sale of items from his workshop was held on 9-10 November; Robert Wilkinson acquired his plates. 




@@@@@


doc= 25393


Sherwin, Ralph (1549/50-1581), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born at Rodsley, near Ashbourne, Derbyshire. His parents were probably John and Constance Sherwin. In 1568 he became a fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, and 'progressed with great industry the several classes of logic and philosophy' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 478). He took his BA on 22 November 1571, and, on 2 July 1574, 'being then accounted an acute philosopher and excellent graecian and hebrician', he took his MA as senior of the act, impressing an audience that included the earl of Leicester, the queen's favourite. 
In 1575 Sherwin left Oxford University and embraced Catholicism. 'Having received leave from Sir John Petre to study medicine abroad' (Boase, 76) he went to Douai and after two years was ordained priest by the bishop of Cambrai on 23 March 1577. In August he proceeded to Rome. In the disputes that took place concerning the direction of the English College, Sherwin played a leading part and became the spokesman for those who saw the future of the college to be a place for the preparation of missioners to England rather than a refuge for exiles. The college annals ('Liber ruber') begin on 23 April 1579 when the college oath was initially administered. Sherwin, aged twenty-nine, was first on the roll, expressing his resolution to go to England 'Today rather than tomorrow'. 
On 18 April 1580 Sherwin left Rome in company with other priests, including Edmund Campion and Robert Persons. He arrived in England some time in August, but in the following November he was captured while preaching in the London home of Nicholas Roscarrock, another alumnus of Exeter College. He was taken to the Marshalsea 'where he lay night and day in a great pair of shackles for the space of a month'. He was transferred to the Tower, was racked twice and was offered a protestant bishopric if he would renounce his faith. Two of his letters written at this time are printed in William Allen's 'Briefe Historie'. 
On 14 November 1581 Sherwin was indicted with seven others, accused of having entered England for the purpose of raising a rebellion and overthrowing the queen. The trial took place in Westminster Hall. The chief proof on which the prosecution relied was the deposition of false witnesses. On 20 November Sherwin, Edmund Campion, and Alexander Briant were condemned to death by hanging, drawing, and quartering, the penalty for common traitors. Two days before he died Sherwin remarked to Campion, pointing to the sun, 'Ah Campion I shall shortly be above yonder fellow'. On 1 December 1581 he was dragged on a hurdle from the Tower to Tyburn where, after the short customary address to the crowd, in which he prayed for the queen, he said he was not guilty of any crime except being a Catholic. Before being hanged he kissed the hands of his executioner which were still wet with the blood of Campion who had just met a similar death. 
Sherwin was canonized by Pope Paul VI in 1970. He is venerated as the proto-martyr of the English College, Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 25394


Sherwin, Ralph (1799-1830), actor, was born on 3 April 1799 at Bishop Auckland, co. Durham. He received a basic education in his birthplace, and subsequently went to school in Witton-le-Wear. For five years he studied medicine in London and Edinburgh, but soon became acquainted with Yates of Covent Garden and was inspired to take to the stage. His first appearance was made in York in July 1818, under Mansell, in the role of Dandie Dinmont in 'Guy Mannering'. He remained in the York company for two years, acting in Leeds, Hull, and Sheffield. He then went to Birmingham, under Alfred Bunn, and lost his wardrobe when the theatre was burnt down. At Brighton, under Brunton, he played low comedy and old men. He later rejoined Bunn at Leicester, and appeared in the newly erected theatre in Birmingham. On 14 February 1823, as Sherwin from York, he made his debut at Drury Lane, playing Dandie Dinmont in 'Guy Mannering' once again. He was engaged for three years, and acted the part of Robin in 'No Song No Supper', Paddock in 'My Spouse and I', and Diggory Delph in 'Family Jars', among others. In 1825 he was the original Shock, a very poor shepherd, in Joseph Lunn's adaptation 'The Shepherd of Derwent Vale, or, The Innocent Culprit', Sam Sharpset in 'The Slave', to W. C. Macready's Gambia, and Russet in George Colman's 'The Jealous Wife'. Few opportunities were given him, however, and he played mainly in minor roles. At the end of the three years he was not re-engaged, irregular habits being the reputed cause of his dismissal. He then took to driving a stage-coach, which he upset, but did return for a short time to the stage. Sherwin had a fine face and figure, expressive features, and a smooth and powerful voice. He was a good mimic, could sketch likenesses with remarkable fidelity, and was an efficient representative of Yorkshire characters. He died in 1830, in Durham, at his father's house. 


@@@@@


doc= 25395


Sherwin, William (1607-1690), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Nottinghamshire. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1624, but in 1625 migrated to Queens' College, Cambridge, where his tutor, Herbert Palmer, later a member of the Westminster assembly of divines, encouraged him to read the millenarian writings of Joseph Mede. Sherwin graduated BA in 1628, was ordained in May 1630, and proceeded MA in 1631. He was married to Dorothea Swan at Ashwell in Hertfordshire on 11 September 1637; there were at least two children from this marriage, a daughter and a son, William Sherwin (b. c.1645, d. in or after 1709) the engraver. 
In 1645 Sherwin was assigned to the lectureship at Baldock, Hertfordshire, and appointed to the sequestered living of Wallington, in the same county, although in October John Bowles, former incumbent of the latter, was called before the committee for plundered ministers for disturbing him. Describing Sherwin's service in Wallington and Baldock, Edmund Calamy remarked that Sherwin cast 'his Net where there was Plenty of Fish. And he did it to good Purpose: For God blessed his Ministry to that great Congregation very much' (Calamy, 361). In 1660, however, Sherwin was ejected from his living when it was restored to Bowles. He then went to live in Fowlmere in Cambridgeshire with his daughter and son-in-law, John Crakinthorpe, who was rector there. 
After his ejection, freed, as he explained, from 'Preaching, Expounding, Catechising, public fasts, &c' (Sherwin, 'Times of Restitution', 3-4), Sherwin resumed his study of apocalyptic prophecy, writing a number of works expounding millenarian doctrines. In 1665 he published ''Eirenikon', or, A peaceable Consideration of Christ's Peaceful Kingdom on Earth to Come', and ''Prodromos': the Fore-Runner of Christ's Peaceable Kingdom upon Earth'. These works set out, albeit moderately and undogmatically, Sherwin's belief that there would be a personal manifestation of Christ in the world to inaugurate the thousand-year millennial kingdom. Sherwin's eschatological thought was influenced by his reading of John Archer's 'The Personall Raigne of Christ upon Earth' (1642), and especially by Mede's writings. In the 1670s Sherwin published more millenarian tracts, presenting his conviction that the advent of Christ's kingdom on earth was imminent, and that the conversion of the Jews to Christianity would occur with Christ's appearance in the world; in the meantime he encouraged his readers to seek unity and peace ('The Doctrine of Christ's Glorious Kingdom', 1672, 1). Having published more than ten new works in the previous seven years, Sherwin's writings ceased abruptly in 1676. His only other extant work is a short tract from 1682 entitled 'Of the Two Last Things', in which he criticized prelacy and the human imposition of laws on worship. Sherwin remained at Fowlmere until his death, and was buried there on 12 June 1690. 


@@@@@


doc= 25396


Sherwin, William (b. c.1645, d. in or after 1709), engraver and inventor of a method of mezzotinting, the son of William Sherwin (1607-1690), a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Dorothea Swan, was born at Wallington, Hertfordshire, where his father was rector, about 1645. Nothing is known of his training, and his first datable plate is a portrait prefixed to Richard Atkyns's 'History of Printing' in 1664. He had established his own shop in London in Little Britain by 1669, when he published John Leeke's translation of Vignola, entitled 'The Complete Architect'. From this time he seems hardly ever to have worked for another publisher. He published few books and hardly any plates made by other engravers. 
1669 is the date on Sherwin's portrait of Charles II, which is the earliest dated mezzotint by an Englishman. The Latin dedication of this and its pair, a portrait of Queen Catherine, to Prince Rupert states that the process was revealed to the artist through the prince's kindness. James Granger, however, states that Sherwin had in fact discovered the secret for himself, using a loaded file to lay the ground. Since the method of laying the ground is the key to the process and had been Rupert's contribution to the development of the mezzotint, Rupert suspected that the secret had been betrayed by his servant. But Sherwin managed to disprove this, and Rupert instead helped him perfect his technique. 
John Chaloner Smith lists twenty mezzotints made by Sherwin between 1669 and 1703, all of which are so rare that it is clear that Sherwin never managed to exploit the process, whose huge development from the end of the 1670s lay in the hands of others. Sherwin also made numerous portrait engravings, which have never been catalogued, as well as a handful of architectural plates and at least one landscape etching. 
The number of Sherwin's prints apparently diminishes after 1676, the year in which he was awarded a patent for inventing a new method of printing calicoes. This seems to be the earliest date for calico printing in Europe, for the first Dutch factory at Amersfoort was only established two years later. Sherwin established a factory at West Ham Abbey in the Lea valley, and in 1696, in a petition in defence of the calico industry, he stated that he and his next neighbour employed about 400 men. He had a secondary factory in London, at Well Yard, near St Bartholomew's Hospital. 
In 1672 Sherwin married Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Pride, one of Cromwell's aides, and his wife, who was a niece of General Monck. This link may have given him access to the capital he needed to establish such a large business. It certainly cannot have come from his print-making, for this never became a large affair. The quality of his work, although always competent, is not high, for he had no real ability in drawing. The Monck relationship led Sherwin and other relatives into a protracted lawsuit after the intestate death of the second duke of Albemarle in 1688, and the last evidence for Sherwin's being alive is a revival of the lawsuit in 1709. 


@@@@@


doc= 25397


Sherwood, Mary Martha (1775-1851), children's writer and educationist, was born on 6 May 1775, at Stanford rectory, Worcestershire, the second child and the older daughter of the Revd George Butt (1741-1795), appointed a chaplain in ordinary to George III in 1784, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Sherwood (died 1817). She was raised and educated in a prosperous but strict home. Tall, well-formed, and auburn-haired, Mary was called Hygeia by her father. Wearing an iron collar to which a backboard was attached, she stood uncomplainingly for daily lessons from her mother; she learned Latin from her father and Greek from her brother, Marten. At fifteen she was sent as a parlour boarder to the Abbey School for Girls at Reading, run by M. and Mme Saint-Quentin. At seventeen she completed her first published story, 'Traditions' (1794), which her father discovered and shepherded into print, for the benefit of their ruined friend, M. Saint-Quentin; lamenting the 'ridiculous and serious defect' of having 'the two wives of the hero existing at the same time' (Kelly, 123), Sherwood recalls her juvenilia in her journal (fifteen volumes edited and abridged to one by her daughter Sophia) as exhibiting 'a mind very far from mature' (Darton, 160). 
After George Butt's death, on 29 September 1795, his widow and children settled at Bridgnorth, Shropshire, where Mary wrote 'Margarita' (1802), sold in 1798 for $40 to Mr Hazard of Bath, and 'Susan Grey' (1802), sold for $10. She admits having her head 'full of romantic imagery' and being 'singularly ignorant of life' (Kelly, 163). At the curate's urging, she and her sister Lucy took charge of the Sunday school, where Mary read successive chapters of 'Susan Grey' to the older girls as warnings against the promises of military men, 'who were there today and gone tomorrow' (Kelly, 220). In spite of this view, on 30 June 1803, she married her cousin, Captain Henry Sherwood (1776-1849), of the 53rd foot regiment, who was appointed paymaster the next year. Life in the barracks at Sunderland, co. Durham, was solitary and bleak. Her first child, Mary Henrietta, was born in 1804 at Morpeth, Northumberland, another military base. She accompanied Captain Sherwood when he was ordered to India in 1805, reluctantly leaving the child with her mother and sister 'to save her health from the effects of other climes' (Kelly, 263). 
The four-month journey round the Cape to Madras, while Mary Sherwood was pregnant again, was full of perils, including attacks from French warships. In their ten-year stay in India, the growing Sherwood family moved from Calcutta to Dinapore, Berhampore, Cawnpore, and Meerut. 'Never without a baby' (Kelly, 303), Sherwood bore four daughters and two sons in India; her first son, Henry, and second daughter, Lucy, died in infancy. Sherwood was convinced that the Indian nurse of the beatific Henry, 'paler and fairer than polished marble' (Kelly, 318), had poisoned him with opium. With evangelical fervour, she set up schools in each of the postings and wrote about family life in an Indian setting. From Cawnpore her husband sent the amazingly successful 'Little Henry and his Bearer' (1815; 37th edn by 1850), the tale of an angelic, dying eight-year-old British orphan who catechizes and directs the conversion of his Hindu bearer Boosy (with the consequent loss of caste), to her sister, who sold it to Mr Hazard of Wellington for $5; in her lifetime it was translated into French, German, Spanish, Hindustani, Chinese, and Sinhalese. The complementary tract, 'Little Lucy and her Dhaye' (1825) highlights a similar turn from Sinbad stories to sacred texts, along with the conversion of the Indian nurse. Despite her contention that 'Pilgrim's Progress' was 'ill-suited to the genius of the East', Sherwood relied on 'this work of honest old John's' (Kelly, 417) for two Bunyanesque redactions, 'The Indian Pilgrim' (1818) and 'The Infant's Progress' (1821), the former concentrating on the supposed depravity and pagan idolatry of Brahmans, fakirs, nautch (dance) girls, and soldiers' temporary wives, and the latter, also composed in India, using abstract topography and introducing Sherwood's own malicious sprite, Inbred-Sin. On the family voyage to Meerut she drafted 'The Fairchild Family' (1818; 2nd pt, 1842; 3rd pt, 1847), the quintessential reading experience, according to F. J. Harvey Darton (p. ix), for every nineteenth-century middle-class child. India remained a rich resource throughout her long career, as evidenced in tracts and novels such as 'George Desmond' (1821), 'Henry Milner' (1823) and its sequel 'John Marten' (1844), and 'The Indian Orphans' (1839). 
On Mary Sherwood's return to England in 1816, with her own family, two adopted orphans, and a motherless girl making up a numerous and expensive brood, she devoted the rest of her long life to writing (over 400 titles are assigned to her) and teaching. Abhorring debt and without 'ready money to throw away' (Darton, 440), she made use of her voluntary work in India by establishing a boarding-school 'for the education of a few young ladies' (Darton, 438-9) in English, French, astronomy, history, geography, grammar, writing, and ciphering, at Wick, Worcestershire. With dogmatic fervour, she edited Sarah Fielding's 'The Governess' (1820), a project promised to her mother, who died on 20 March 1817. On half pay in the Brunswick hussars, Captain Sherwood opened a little school in Henwick, Worcestershire. Her eighth child, George, born in 1819, died in infancy. She taught her children Hebrew while working on a dictionary of 'Old Testament' types; Captain Sherwood laboured for ten years on a Hebrew-English concordance. 
Whether writing for children or adults, Mary Sherwood was unwilling to temper her conviction of inherent human corruption. Mr Fairchild conducts his quarrelling youngsters to view the rotting corpse of a fratricide on a gibbet to teach them 'that our hearts by nature are full of hatred' ('Fairchild Family', 59). Sherwood's visit to her brother's parsonage at Oddingley, Worcestershire, resulted in the two-part 'The Oddingley Murders' (1830), a grisly true story of the murder of the pastor, the subsequent execution of the assassin hired by local folk who resisted tithes, and the wanting 'spirit of harmony and benevolence' in this 'unhappy parish' (pp. 6-7). Literature for all ranks had a catechetical utility for Sherwood, whether in the four-volume 'The lady of the manor, being conversations on confirmation intended for the use of the middle and higher ranks of females' (1825-9), or her short contributions to 'The Youth's Magazine', or her editorship of 'The Child's Magazine'. The dynamics of family life, always reflecting the foundational importance of Christian principles, also informed her work, from the piety of the English boarder in 'The Flowers of the Forest' (1830), the Christian education of the boy-narrator in 'The Babes in the Wood of the New World' (1830), and the fond memories of 'The Happy Family' (1838), to the instructive contrasts between siblings in the historical novels she completed with the help of her daughter Sophia, 'The Mirror of Maidens in the Days of Queen Bess' (1851) and 'The Two Knights, or, Delancey Castle: a Tale of the Civil Wars' (1851). Although her anti-Catholicism was a staple of the times, it became particularly virulent with her characterization of greedy Father Peter in the allegory 'The Latter Days' (1833), her lurid descriptions of the 'frightful prison house' (p. 53) and 'various little low cabals' (p. 2) of the convent in the gothic novel 'The Nun' (1833; 5 edns to 1860), and the blistering depiction of religious houses in another gothic, 'The Monk of Cimies' (1834). An abolitionist whose attitude toward the indigene was condescending yet occasionally sympathetic, resolutely maintaining that native beliefs ought to be supplanted by Christianity, she succeeded in creating compelling portraits of Dazee in 'The Re-Captured Negro' (1821) and Thomas Wilson in 'The Poor Man of Colour' (1830). 
Mary Sherwood's travels and acquaintances expanded her circle of influence and experience. She was definitely more at ease during a meeting with William Wilberforce, in 1820, at the china manufactory in Worcester, when he wanted to hear about India, and in her coach ride to Worcester gaol with Elizabeth Fry, in 1821, where they talked about 'the dangers of celebrity, for females especially' (Kelly, 537), than she had been, before her marriage, during an audience at Bath with Hannah More, who 'spoke well' but whose sisters 'gathered up her words carefully, rather Boswellian-like' (Kelly, 217). Throughout the 1830s the Sherwoods travelled extensively on the continent, especially in France and Switzerland; on the return vessel from Holland, in 1832, she met the frail, invalided Sir Walter Scott, to whom she lent pen and ink. Sherwood's work regimen remained prodigious; until her mid-seventies, she read the smallest print, wrote four to five hours each day, and considered herself 'one of the very happiest old women that ever cumbered this earth' (Kelly, 573). In 1849 Captain and Mrs Sherwood left Worcester for Isleworth and then Twickenham, Middlesex, where Captain Sherwood died on 6 December, Mary Sherwood following him on 20 September 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 25398


Sherwood, Robert (fl. 1622-1634), lexicographer, was born in Norfolk. He entered Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on 7 June 1622, and graduated BA in 1625/6. His tutor was Richard Sterne, who later assisted in Bishop Walton's polyglot 'Bible' (1657), and became archbishop of York. Sherwood moved to London, established a school in St Sepulchre's churchyard, and compiled the English-French dictionary that was appended to the second edition of Randle Cotgrave's 'Dictionary of the French and English Tongues' (1632). 
Sherwood was the first lexicographer to compile a word-list appearing in a bi-directional bilingual dictionary in which the English is set before the French. The work was entitled 'A dictionarie English and French; compiled for the commoditie of all such as are desirous of both the languages' and was puffed as 'most copious' on the title-page to Cotgrave's French-English dictionary. His two prefaces were written with an eye to the different needs of both groups of target users. Sherwood apologizes to the English user for the space-saving restrictions imposed upon him by the printer, but makes a virtue of necessity: 'It could not be expected in so small a volume, as I was inforced to contract my selfe into, that (in this English Dictionarie) I should show all the French Nounes, and the conjugation of all French Verbes, which are most sufficiently and at large, alreadie done by M. Cotgrave; to whom I referre you.' In his preface 'Aux favorables lecteurs francois, alemans, & autres' he is keen to stress the comprehensive nature of his word-list, which he claims contains all or most of the words in the English language, and the usefulness of the back-matter, which comprises a pronunciation guide and a list of irregular verbs. Sherwood's work was retained, with minor additions to the back-matter, in the editions of Cotgrave's dictionary that were revised and enlarged by James Howell (1650, 1660, 1673). 
In 1634 Sherwood published 'The French Tutour,... the Second Edition, Carefully Corrected and Enlarged'. It survives only in this text, though it was entered in the Stationers' register on 3 January 1625, and since no copy has been located, the existence of the first edition is open to question. The grammatical element of the work is largely derived from the revised 1625 edition of Charles Maupas's 'Grammaire et syntaxe francoise' (Sherwood, iv). Only one additional fact about Sherwood survives: he was ordained deacon in Norwich on 23 December 1632. 


@@@@@


doc= 25399


Sherwood, William (d. 1482), bishop of Meath and administrator, was a priest of the archdiocese of York who was provided to the bishopric of Meath in March 1460. There is no evidence that Sherwood participated with Philip Bermingham, the future chief justice, in the Lancastrian insurrection in Meath in 1462, but he was soon leading the Meath gentry in opposition to Geraldine (Fitzgerald) pretensions there. After Thomas Fitzgerald, seventh earl of Desmond (died 1468), had ignored Edward IV's appointment of Sherwood as deputy chancellor in January 1464, a feud ensued and the two were summoned to court. Sherwood's renewed opposition to Desmond's rule apparently helped to secure the earl's supersession and attainder in 1467-8. 
In July 1475 the bishop replaced Thomas Fitzgerald, seventh earl of Kildare (died 1478), as deputy lieutenant, and therefore deputy to George, duke of Clarence, the absent lieutenant of Ireland. The reduction of English financial subventions prompted Sherwood to reorganize the parliamentary subsidy and impose heavy taxation on the English pale. He went to court in 1477, where Edward IV tried to compose new disputes with Kildare; but when, in February 1478, Clarence was executed for treason, thus annulling Sherwood's appointment, Kildare was elected governor instead. This time, serious disturbances followed, which were not finally settled until late in 1479 when the king reconciled Sherwood and Chief Justice Bermingham with Gerald Fitzgerald (died 1513), the young eighth earl of Kildare, now appointed deputy lieutenant, and Lord Portlester, the chancellor. Sherwood became chancellor and served without further trouble until his death in Dublin on 3 December 1482. He was buried at Newtown Abbey, near Trim, Meath. 


@@@@@


doc= 25400


Shewen, William (c.1631-1695), Quaker preacher, was of unknown parentage, and nothing is known of him before 1654. By this date Shewen had joined the Southwark Quaker Meeting, which was then gathering in private homes, including Shewen's house at the sign of Two Brewers in Bermondsey Street, Bermondsey. Describing himself in his will as a gentleman, Shewen appears to have been involved in business of some description, for an acquaintance of the Welsh Quaker Richard Davies was apprenticed to him. In 1679 he married Ann Raper (died 1706), with whom he had three children. 
Shewen was appointed an elder of the meeting in the parish of St Mary Magdalen, Southwark, and from the 1650s onwards was active in the Quaker movement as both preacher and controversialist. In 1659 he was among a number of Quaker preachers subjected to 'manifold Abuses' by hecklers at meetings in Mitcham, Surrey (Besse, 1.680). In April 1674 he engaged in a public dispute with the Baptist leader Jeremiah Ives in Croydon, Surrey. This doctrinal quarrel continued as a pamphlet controversy throughout that year and launched Shewen's career as a printed author. Over the next two decades Shewen published a number of doctrinal and devotional works. His works pleaded constantly for liberty of conscience and for toleration at the most parochial level, his writing arising from ongoing experience of persecution. In 1683 he was among a number of Quakers who, barred from their meeting-house in Horselydown, were arrested for meeting instead in the street. In March 1686 a royal warrant calling for the halt of legal proceedings against Shewen and his wife, among others, identified the former as a 'recusant' of St Mary Magdalen, Southwark ('CSP dom.', '1686-7', 72). 
Later that year Shewen and his wife moved to Enfield, Middlesex. It is presumably here that he died on 28 May 1695, aged about sixty-four; he was buried at Bunhill Fields. By the time of his death he was of substantial means, leaving a well-appointed property in Enfield and over $2000 in disposable money. The instructions detailed in his will indicate, moreover, that Shewen had considerable financial acumen. 
Despite his regular subjection, as an early Quaker, to prejudice and harassment, Shewen's ministry nevertheless seems to have been combined with a successful business career. Author of 'several seasonable experimental treatises' (Whiting, 508), Shewen is most aptly characterized in his own words: applauding William III's declaration for liberty of conscience, the title-page to his last work, 'A Brief Testimony for Religion' (1688), announces that it is written by 'a Hater of no man because of his opinion'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25401


Shield, William (bap. 1748/9, d. 1829), composer, was born at Swalwell in the parish of Whickham, co. Durham, the son of William Shield (died 1757), a music teacher. There appears to be no evidence documenting his birth, although there is reference to a baptism of one William Shields on 5 May 1748, and of another William Shields on 5 March 1749. If the latter, his mother's name was Mary. He was educated by his father until the elder Shield's death, when he was apprenticed to a boatbuilder named Edward Davidson (or Davison) of South (or North) Shields; but he continued his musical studies under the composer and concert organizer Charles Avison, for whom he frequently played the violin at concerts. According to his nineteenth-century biographer John Robinson, it was after one of these concerts that he was introduced to Felice Giardini, who ultimately persuaded him to become a professional musician. Fiske places this fortuitous meeting at Scarborough, to which Shield had moved on the completion of his apprenticeship. It was there, through the instrumentality of John Cunningham, the poet and actor, that he was appointed leader of the band at the theatre and conductor of the concerts. Here he encountered his earliest success as a composer by setting poems by Cunningham to music, and, at the request of Richard Trevor, bishop of Durham, he composed his earliest composition, an anthem now lost, for the consecration of St John's Church, Sunderland, on 6 April 1769. On the death of Avison in 1770 his son Edward Avison engaged Shield as leader at the Newcastle concerts and Shield also held a similar position in Durham. At this time Shield played violin extensively in concerts and theatres throughout the north-east, but concert life slackened during the construction of the new assembly rooms in Newcastle, and in 1773 he accepted Giardini's offer of the post among the violins in the orchestra of the King's Theatre in the Haymarket, London. He is not known to have resided in the north-east again, but returned to visit his mother in 1791. Shield progressed quickly to become leader of the viola section and retained this post for eighteen years. His ability to orchestrate and compose for theatre was learned primarily through his experience playing in this and other metropolitan operatic orchestras. In London, Shield met Ann Stokes, of Marylebone, described in his will in 1826 as his 'beloved partner, Ann, Mrs Shield, upwards of forty years' (Robinson, 13-14). The probate record describes her as 'Ann Stokes, alias Shield, spinster' (Robinson, 13); it is not clear whether they married. 
Shield is known to have composed, or contributed music towards at least thirty-six operas and seven pantomimes and pantomime ballets. In addition to these he produced three song collections and published several of his most popular theatre songs independently. His work outside theatre music is relatively modest, including a small number of duets, string quartets, and string trios. 
Shield's first operatic venture was the music to 'Flitch of Bacon', a comic opera by Henry Bate, afterwards Sir Henry Bate Dudley. It was produced by George Colman at the Haymarket Theatre in 1778 and shows enormous ingenuity in orchestration. Shield subsequently produced two works in rapid succession: 'The Cobbler of Casterbury' (1779) and 'The Siege of Gibraltar' (1780), both for Covent Garden, but neither an unmitigated success. In 1782, however, Shield produced 'Rosina', and through its success Shield was appointed house composer at Covent Garden. 'Rosina' is set in the north of England, inspiring Shield to end its overture with a tune reminiscent of bagpipes. This tune became much better known as the music to 'Auld Lang Syne' by Robert Burns, whose 'Comin' thro' the rye' was also set to Shield's music. The two never met. Although Shield's operas were produced mostly in vocal score and libretto, 'Rosina' is the only one to survive in orchestral parts, and for this reason it is especially significant in assessing Shield's ability to orchestrate for theatre. Such was the extent of Shield's success that in 1791 he entertained Haydn, among others, in his home in Taplow. It was presumably then, as a gesture of mutual respect, that Haydn presented him with his trio 'Pieta di me', complete with concertante parts for English horn, bassoon, and horn. In August 1792 he resigned his office at Covent Garden owing to a financial disagreement, and went to France and Italy with Joseph Ritson, the antiquary. On his return a few months later he was immediately reinstated, but resigned in 1797 and dissolved all connection with the theatre ten years later. In 1793 he, Charles Incledon, Bannister the elder, and others formed the once famous Glee Club; he was also an original member of the Philharmonic Society. The time that Shield had gained by reducing his theatre commitments may have been directed towards writing. In 1800 he published 'An Introduction to Harmony', which was followed in 1817 by 'The Rudiments of Thorough Bass', designed as a teaching aid; in it Shield took the opportunity to publish several of the folk-songs he had learned as a child. 
On the death of Sir William Parsons in 1817 Shield became master of musicians in ordinary to the king. Shield died at his home, 31 Berners Street, London, on 25 January 1829, and was buried on 4 February in the south cloister of Westminster Abbey, in the same grave as Johann Peter Salomon and Muzio Clementi. He left his fine Stainer viola to George IV who, however, insisted on paying Ann Stokes its full value. On 19 October 1891 a memorial cross to Shield was erected by public subscription, supported by the newspaper publisher Joseph Cowen, in Whickham churchyard, and on 25 January 1892 a memorial stone was placed over his grave in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 25402


Shiels, Robert (d. 1753), compiler, was born in Roxburghshire, Scotland, about the end of the seventeenth century, to humble parents, and went to London as a journeyman printer. He had little formal education but was possessed of 'a very acute understanding' (Johnson, 'Poets', 2.329) and a retentive memory. 
In 1748 Samuel Johnson, to whom Shiels was further recommended by his devout Jacobitism, employed him as one of six amanuenses on his 'Dictionary', along with the Macbean brothers, Stewart, Maitland, and Peyton. Interestingly, given Johnson's well known views on that nation, all but the last named were Scots. At the conclusion of his work on the 'Dictionary' in 1752 Shiels was commissioned by the publisher Ralph Griffiths to compile 'Lives of the Poets of Great Britain and Ireland, to the Time of Dean Swift' (5 vols., 1753), the claim to authorship of which was at the time hotly disputed between him and Theophilus Cibber. Although Shiels was certainly the principal compiler of the work, Cibber had been engaged as editor 'with power to alter, expunge, or add, as he liked' (Boswell, 'Life', 3.30). The two men were quite opposite in character as in politics: Cibber was something of a dilettante, Shiels pernickety and pedantic; the former as staunch a whig as the latter was devout a tory. As well as correcting his style and making judicious additions Cibber felt bound to excise Shiels's tory sentiments wherever he found them surfacing in the text. Shiels, outraged at the mutilation of his copy, was only dissuaded from challenging Cibber to a duel by the intervention of Griffiths. Cibber's name alone duly appeared on the title-page of the first volume (the later volumes generously allowed 'and other hands'). Shiels justifiably felt piqued, although Johnson, always well disposed towards his former employee, went too far when he attributed the whole credit of the work to him (Johnson, 'Poets', 2.329). The compilation was in fact largely based on Langbaine and Jacobs, with the aid of Coxeter's notes, and did not contain much original matter. 
Apart from his compilations Shiels also wrote poetry, in a style much influenced by that of James Thomson. His verses include 'Marriage' (1747), a didactic poem in blank verse, and 'Beauty' (printed in 1766 together with James Grainger's 'The Sugar Cane' and wrongly ascribed to that author), a piece which contains praise of Johnson's 'Irene' (1749). Above even Dr Johnson, Shiels venerated his countryman Thomson, on whose death in 1748 he published an elegy of some merit, 'Musidorus'. Shiels was also Thomson's first biographer (in 'Lives of the Poets'). However, his admiration seems to have been rather more fatuous than discriminating, if Johnson may be believed: 'I took down Thomson, and read aloud a large portion of him, and then asked, -- Is not this fine? Shiels having expressed the highest admiration. Well, Sir, (said I,) I have omitted every other line' (Boswell, 'Life', 3.37). 
Shiels died of consumption in May's Buildings, London, on 27 December 1753. Johnson, who had frequently afforded Shiels financial aid during his last illness, provided his epitaph: 'his life was virtuous, and his end was pious' (Johnson, 'Poets', 2.329). 


@@@@@


doc= 25403


Arthur Richard Shilleto (1848-1894), translator, was born in Cambridge on 18 June 1848, and educated at Harrow, before proceeding in 1867 to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA as a scholar in 1871 and MA in 1876. Ordained deacon in 1871 and priest in 1872, he served curacies until 1877 when he was appointed second master at King Edward VI's Grammar School at Stratford upon Avon. From 1879 to 1882 he was master of Ulverston School. He was curate of Satterthwaite, Lancashire, from 1881 to 1883, and of Lower Slaughter, Gloucestershire, from 1883 to 1885. He produced translations of Pausanias (2 vols., 1886), Plutarch's 'Morals' (1888), and 'Josephus' (5 vols., 1889-90). He also prepared notes for an edition of Robert Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy' (1893) and was a frequent contributor to 'Notes and Queries' under the anagram Erato Hills. After many years' suffering from mental illness, Shilleto died on 19 January 1894. 


@@@@@


doc= 25404


Shilleto, Richard (1809-1876), classical scholar, son of John Shilleto of Ulleskelf, Yorkshire, was born there on 25 November 1809. He was educated first at Repton and then under Dr Samuel Butler at Shrewsbury School, where he was head boy. He was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1828 and was made a scholar in 1830. W. H. Thompson, later regius professor of Greek and master of Trinity, was among his exact contemporaries. Shilleto was second in the first class of the classical tripos. In his day, however, candidates for honours had to satisfy the examiners in both this and the mathematical tripos in which Shilleto was unfortunately bracketed bottom in 1832. On 7 January 1834 he married Isabella Snelgar; they had one daughter and seven sons, three of whom followed him to Cambridge. Shilleto proceeded MA in 1835 and was ordained in 1838, but owing to his marriage he could not become the fellow of a college, although he examined in the classical tripos in 1839 and 1840 and was for many years a college lecturer at Trinity and at King's. 
The introduction of the classical tripos in 1824 had not resulted in much improvement in the preparation provided by college teachers, so virtually every candidate for honours had to go to a private coach whom he paid to correct the translations and more especially the compositions which formed the bulk of the examination. Shilleto quickly became the most celebrated of Cambridge coaches, a reputation he maintained for over thirty years. He taught most of those who were themselves to become leading school and university teachers, and thus his influence was far wider than that of any other Cambridge classical instructor of the time. His reputation was based upon his industry (in 1859 he was reported as coaching three days of eleven hours and three of twelve each week), the success of his pupils, and his eccentricity. He enjoyed controversy whether in scholarship (as in his intemperate attack, published in 1851, on the accuracy of Grote's knowledge of Thucydides in his 'History of Greece') or local affairs, which he often celebrated in classical or English verse. 
Shilleto was a heavy drinker, and this hindered his professional advancement. In 1862 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the chair of Greek at Durham, despite having assembled a dozen impressive testimonials from leading scholars. In 1867 he should have been a strong contender for the regius chair at Cambridge vacated by his contemporary W. H. Thompson, but it was annexed to a canonry at Ely for which he was not deemed suitable. In the same year, however, he was elected a fellow of Peterhouse under a statute which permitted the election of eminent married scholars. He gave up coaching and was appointed assistant tutor, dean, praelector, and librarian. He died at 4 Bateman Street, Cambridge, on 24 September 1876. Despite his years of coaching he left under $3000. His widow was granted a civil-list pension of $150 in 1878, and his daughter, Catherine, one of $50 in 1890. 
Shilleto was regarded as the greatest Greek scholar in England since Gaisford. His particular expertise was in Greek prose diction, but he left few published proofs of his learning. His only complete editions were of Demosthenes 'De falsa legatione' (1844, and three further editions during his lifetime) and Thucydides book 1 (1872). He produced various 'adversaria' to classical authors, including Thucydides, Hyperides, and Aristotle. Many of his books, some of which are in the Cambridge University Library, contain detailed unpublished marginalia. He contributed to early volumes of the 'Journal of Philology' and, under the anagram Charles Thiriold, to 'Notes and Queries'. His skill as a translator into Greek and Latin prose and verse is exhibited by the large selection of his compositions published in 1901, as well as by contributions to the anthologies 'Sabrinae corolla' and 'Arundines Cami'. 
Shilleto's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 25405


Shillibeer, George (1797-1866), omnibus promoter, was born in Tottenham Court Road, London, but nothing else is known about his origins. He entered the navy, but did not remain long in the service, quitting it as midshipman. He then went to a firm in Long Acre to be taught coach building. In 1825 he sought cabriolet licences in London and a year later was in business with John Cavill, coach builder and livery stable keeper, Bury Street, Bloomsbury. He also possessed what he claimed as 'an establishment' in Paris 'for the sale ['sic'] of carriages'. 
In July 1828 Shillibeer petitioned the Treasury to be allowed to run omnibuses of the sort which had started in Paris two months before -- which he had visited Paris to see -- under the more English name of 'Economist'. His petition was turned down because of the hackney coach monopoly on London's central streets. This, however, did not prevent him from running under stage coach legislation north of the central area along the new road from Paddington Green to the Bank via Islington. He started a three-horse vehicle on the route carrying twenty passengers all inside on 4 July 1829, charging high middle-class fares -- a shilling all the way (6died half way) -- and wisely called his vehicle, the latest from Paris, an omnibus not an economist. 
Shillibeer knew how to copy the carriage-building ideas of others but was unable to exploit his initial advantage. Although he soon put five more of his larger omnibuses on the route, competitors ran many more, wisely preferring more manoeuvrable two-horse vehicles licensed to carry fifteen (twelve inside and three on the roof by the coachman), which paid lower mileage duty, levied on the vehicle irrespective of the number of passengers carried. Shillibeer was unable to meet the higher mileage duty on his vehicles and a commission of bankruptcy was ordered against him on 4 March 1831, though he continued in business after assignees had been appointed. The others could not withstand the competition much longer and the racing to pick up passengers was proving dangerous. Operators met on 10 September 1831 and, paying Shillibeer the compliment of appointing him to the chair, decided to stop thirty-three vehicles and allocate scheduled times at three-minute intervals to the remaining fifty-seven. These times could be bought and sold, thus enabling larger business to be built up. 
Omnibuses were admitted to the central area when the hackney coach monopoly was ended on 5 January 1832 but Shillibeer's larger vehicles were unsuitable for the narrow streets. He ran a three-horse 'New Patent Improved Diligence' from London to Brighton during the 1830s and put omnibuses on the route from London to Greenwich and Woolwich from 1833; but steamboat competition and the opening of the first part of the London and Greenwich Railway diverted passengers. Again he was unable to pay his taxes but this time (1836) all his property was seized and he had to flee to Boulogne to escape his creditors. On his return he was sentenced in the insolvent debtors court to several months in the Fleet prison. When released, he took a job on the London and Southampton Railway but soon found himself inside again after 130 gallons of uncustomed brandy, smuggled from Boulogne, were discovered in premises he owned in Camden Town. From prison he sought Treasury recognition of his services in introducing the omnibus to London either by an appointment as inspector of omnibus duties or permission to operate twenty omnibuses tax-free for seven years. These entreaties came to nothing, however, partly, it would seem, because of the change of government in 1841. 
Shillibeer's last years were relatively tranquil and more remunerative. He patented a new type of funeral carriage and, again copying Paris, took the Pompes Funebres as his model which cut funeral costs, and set up as an undertaker in the City Road. He gave evidence before the Board of Health on the question of extramural sepulture in 1850. He died from a carbuncle, on 22 August 1866, at 7 North Street, Quadrant, Brighton, and was buried in the churchyard at Chigwell, Essex, where in 1929, the busmen of London erected a tablet in the church in memory of the 'inventor of the London Omnibus'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25406


Shilling, Andrew (d. 1621), naval officer in the East India Company, of unknown parentage, is first recorded on 25 November 1589, when he married Agnes Poape (died 1620) at Plymouth. His eldest daughter, Damaris (who is mentioned in his will), the first of at least ten children, was baptized at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, on 8 October 1592. Shilling served as master's mate of the 'Edward Bonaventure' under Captain James Lancaster on a privateering voyage in 1590 and was master of the 'Golden Dragon', a privateer commanded by Captain Christopher Newport, in 1593. 
No evidence has been found to support a statement that Shilling began as a petty officer in the navy, but he was appointed one of the six masters attendant of the navy, whose duties were mainly in harbour, on 30 May 1603. The post did not preclude other employment, and he was master of the 'Angel' on merchant voyages to the Mediterranean in 1609, 1612, and 1614. He was an elder brother of Trinity House by 1612. Although considered for employment by the East India Company in 1610 and 1615, neither appointment materialized, but he was master of the 'Anne Royal' in the East India Company voyage commanded by Martin Pring in 1617. Apart from an unfortunate incident when the failure of his gunner to remove the shot from a gun before firing a salute resulted in a death ashore, Shilling did well. After accomplishing a mission to the Red Sea to secure freedom of trade in 1618 he arrived back in England in September 1619. 
The East India Company quickly decided to appoint Shilling as commander of their next voyage. The lord high admiral was reluctant to grant permission, describing Shilling as one of the most able men in the kingdom. The company retorted that the navy had terminated his appointment as master attendant because of his involvement with them, and eventually agreement was secured. There was friction between Shilling and the company because of his alterations to his ship, the 'London', and his complaints about the state of his fleet, but the ships left Tilbury on 26 February 1620. Two days later Shilling's wife was buried. Before leaving England, Shilling made his will. 
After reaching Surat, Shilling sent two ships to the Persian Gulf, but hearing of the presence there of a strong Portuguese squadron, he followed with two more ships, capturing a Portuguese ship on the way. He met the first two English ships returning, but Shilling resolved to fight. The first encounter off Jask on 16 December 1620 was indecisive and the Portuguese prize was mistakenly set on fire. Battle resumed on 28 December, but a calm prevented two of the four English ships engaging. The Portuguese fled, but Shilling was mortally wounded, died on 6 January 1621, and was buried ashore three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 25407


Shillitoe, Thomas (1754-1836), Quaker minister, was born at Gray's Inn, Holborn, London, on 24 February 1754, the fourth of the six children of Richard Shillito (died in or after 1779), librarian, and Frances, 'nee' Benson (died in or after 1779). Richard Shillito had in 1750 been appointed librarian of Gray's Inn but shortly after Thomas's birth the family moved to Whitechapel, and in 1766 they took the Three Tuns inn at Islington, where Thomas acted as potboy. He was then apprenticed to a grocer and was for a time at Portsmouth, whence he returned to London in the early 1770s. His upbringing was in the established church, and after his return to London he accompanied his master to the Foundling Hospital chapel for about three years until he met, and enjoyed the company of, a distant relative 'descended from Friends'. Thomas now started to go with him to Friends' meetings but, the relative being far from strict, they spent the rest of the day convivially at fashionable places of resort. After about a year Thomas, now more decided in his Quaker convictions, abandoned frivolity for the afternoon meeting for worship. He joined the Friends (despite the 'great displeasure' of his father) about 1775. His sister Margaret (1748-1795) was travelling a similar spiritual path and became a member of the Society of Friends in December 1776. 
Shillitoe was helped to a situation with a Quaker banking firm in Lombard Street (not necessarily Barclays, as Hine asserts). Shocked, however, that, contrary to Friends' principles, the firm handled lottery tickets, he left it in 1778 and learned the trade of a shoemaker, the occupation of his future wife's father. London did not suit his health and he moved that year to Tottenham. On 13 July 1779 he married Mary (1746-1838), daughter of John Pace and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Jeynes, of Spitalfields; the couple had three sons and four daughters, of whom one son and one daughter died in infancy. Shillitoe's sister Margaret married in 1786 John Sanderson (1749?-1816), a London tallow chandler; their daughters married into established Quaker dynasties -- Mary (1788-1846) in 1821 to Sylvanus Fox (1791-1851) of the woollen manufacturing concern at Wellington, Somerset, and Elizabeth (1793-1901) in 1826 to Cornelius Hanbury (1796-1869), partner in the firm of Allen and Hanbury. 
Before he left London, Shillitoe had begun to speak in Friends' meetings, and his gift in the vocal ministry was acknowledged by Tottenham monthly meeting in 1790. By 1806, having made sufficient money to ensure an annual income of $100, he retired from business and devoted himself to his Quaker and philanthropic interests. Thereafter he travelled almost continually throughout Britain, in Ireland (three visits, 1808-11), on the continent of Europe (1821-3, 1824-5), and in North America (1826-30). In 1812 he and his wife (with their daughter Hannah) moved to Barnsley, Yorkshire, to be near their recently widowed daughter Mary, and in 1819 they settled in Hitchin, Hertfordshire, where their daughter Margaret (1784-1847) and her husband, John Whiting (1776-1853), lived. In 1826 Shillitoe's wife returned to Tottenham, where he joined her on his return from America. 
About the mid-1780s Shillitoe had become a teetotaller and a vegetarian. Though nervously preoccupied about his health he was in fact physically tough, often walking 30 miles a day; even at eighty he would walk from the City back home to Tottenham. James Everett, a Hitchin Methodist, depicted him: 'he was below the middle height, spare, active, buoyant in spirit, and appeared as if made of wire and muscle. He was generally attired in a 'pepper and salt' suit, with a dowlas shirt often open at the neck, and a chip hat, which he usually carried in his hand, or on his umbrella stick in hot weather. He walked vigorously, often with his coat over his arm. (Hine, 187)' Despite nervous fears (he would run across London Bridge in dread lest it collapse beneath him) he had indomitable moral courage once he was convinced he was doing God's requirings. Thus in Ireland, usually with other Friends, he systematically visited drinking houses (eighty in Waterford alone), speaking with the keepers and also frequently 'to the company sitting in them to drink, who mostly heard quietly what we had to offer and at our parting behaved respectfully' (Shillitoe, 1.91). At the other end of the social scale his 1824 continental visit included 'religious opportunities' with the duke of Cumberland at Hanover, the crown prince of Prussia at Berlin, the king of Prussia at Charlottenburg, the king of Denmark at Copenhagen, and the emperor Alexander I at Petersburg. Back at home he had more than one interview with George IV. He passed by sentries into palaces and by warders into prisons and seemed intuitively to respond to the needs of those to whom he felt called. 
Shillitoe's religious temperament was mystical but his theology was orthodox. During his American visit, smelling infidelity in the followers of Elias Hicks, he was more preoccupied in preaching against them than in listening to what they actually said. Thus, though sincere in wanting to promote unity among American Quakers, his visits may well have hastened the disastrous separations of 1827-8. During the 1830s, however, he was alarmed at the increasing emphasis that some British Friends were placing on the scriptures rather than the spirit as a primary rule. His quiet humour remained until the end. He said to his medical attendant: 'I will take any thing in moderation, that will not affect my intellect. I want to go out of the world with a clear head and a clean heart' (Shillitoe, 2.425). He died on 12 June 1836 at Tottenham, where five days later his body was interred in the Quaker burial-ground. He was survived by his wife, who died on 23 February 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 25408


Shipley, Sir Charles (1755-1815), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 18 February 1755 at Copt Hall, Luton, Bedfordshire, the son of Richard Shipley, of Stamford, Lincolnshire, and of Copt Hall, a cavalry captain, and his wife, Jane, the daughter of Robert Rudyerd, of Wormley, Hertfordshire. The latter was great-grandson and representative of Sir Benjamin Rudyerd (1572-1658) of West Woodhay, Berkshire. On the death of Shipley's mother's only brother, Captain Benjamin Rudyerd of the Coldstream Guards (who was aide-de-camp to Lord Stair at the battle of Dettingen, and whose various accomplishments were celebrated by Smollett in the 'Memoirs of a Lady of Quality' as those of Mr R -- ), his mother became sole heir of the families of Maddox and Rudyerd, but, owing to his father's extravagance, Charles Shipley inherited little. 
On 1 April 1771, after a period at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, Shipley, aged sixteen, was commissioned ensign and practitioner engineer. In 1772 he went to Minorca. On 4 March 1776 he was promoted lieutenant and sub-engineer. He returned to England in 1778, and was stationed at Gravesend as engineer on the staff. In Gravesend, in May 1780, he married Mary (died 1820), the daughter of James Teale and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Dr Ralph Blomer, prebendary of Canterbury. They had three daughters. 
From 1780 to 1783 Shipley reportedly served in the Leeward Islands, and in 1788 he went to the West Indies and was stationed at Antigua. Early in 1792 he returned to England to be court-martialled for disobedience to regulations in employing his own slaves in Antigua on government fortification work. The court sat at the Horse Guards from 23 February to 1 March, found Shipley guilty, and sentenced him to twelve months' suspension from rank and pay, but stated that his conduct did not stem from any corrupt motive. 
On 15 August 1793 Shipley was promoted captain. At the request of Sir John Vaughan, commander-in-chief in the West Indies, he again applied to be sent thither, and embarked in November with his family in the government storeship 'Woodley'. After leaving Plymouth severe storms compelled them to put into Gibraltar and Cadiz for some weeks, and when at length they arrived within a few miles of Barbados they were captured by the French corvette 'Perdrix'. The prisoners were confined in hulks at Guadeloupe, and suffered great hardships; but Shipley's wife was set free, and eventually managed to obtain the liberation of her husband from the notorious French republican commander Victor Hugues. 
Shipley was promoted major in the army on 6 May 1795. In May 1796 he sent home reports on the defences of Martinique and of Prince Rupert's Head, Dominica, and on 20 October that year he was appointed commanding royal engineer of the Windward and Leeward Islands. In February 1797 he accompanied Sir Ralph Abercromby as commanding royal engineer of his expedition to Trinidad; the Spaniards surrendered the island on the 17th. He also accompanied Abercromby as commanding royal engineer, and took part in the unsuccessful attack on Puerto Rico in April. The British failed to capture San Juan, and re-embarked. This marked the end of the British offensive expeditions to the Caribbean: 'the heyday of Caribbean warfare was over' (Duffy, 291). On 11 September 1798 Shipley was promoted lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Engineers. 
In 1799 Shipley was sent by Lieutenant-General Thomas Trigge in the 'Amphitrite' to examine the coasts in the neighbourhood of the Surinam River for a landing-place to attack Surinam. Trigge, in his dispatch (22 August 1799), stated that Shipley acted with great zeal and judgement. Surinam surrendered on 20 August but was soon retaken. Shipley also took part, during March, in the capture of the islands of St Bartholomew, St Martin, and St Thomas, and of Santa Cruz. On 21 and 22 June 1803 he commanded a detachment of infantry at the capture of St Lucia. In April 1804 an expedition was sent under Brigadier-General Charles Green, temporarily commanding in chief in the Leeward Islands, against Dutch Guiana. Shipley accompanied it as commanding royal engineer, and, having landed with Lieutenant Arnold of the Royal Engineers and a small party, reconnoitred the defences of Surinam, which was again captured. Green, in his dispatch to Lord Camden, dated 13 May 1804, admitted obligations to Shipley, as commanding engineer, 'far beyond my power to express'. 
On 13 July 1805 Shipley was accordingly promoted colonel in the Royal Engineers, and on 12 June 1806 brigadier-general to the forces serving in the West Indies. In that year, under orders from the Board of Ordnance, he made the circuit of the coast of Jamaica and explored the interior with a view to a survey. In 1807 he accompanied the expedition from Barbados against the Danish West Indian islands under General Bowyer and Rear-Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane. They arrived before St Thomas on 21 December, when Shipley was sent ashore to demand from the governor, von Scholten, the surrender of St Thomas and St John, which capitulated the next day. On 23 December the expedition sailed for Santa Cruz, and Shipley was again sent on shore to negotiate terms. The governor would capitulate only if some of his officers were allowed to inspect the British ships and troops and satisfy his honour that the British force was so strong that resistance would be hopeless. Shipley agreed, and the island capitulated on 25 December 1807. 
On 22 March 1808 Shipley was knighted, and in that same year he sent home proposals for strengthening the defences of the island of St Thomas. In January 1809 he took part in the expedition against Martinique under Lieutenant-General Sir George Beckwith. He landed on 30 January and began operations against Pigeon Island, admirably supported by Captain George Cockburn (1772-1853) of HMS 'Pompee' and his sailors. The night after the batteries opened fire the enemy surrendered, and Pigeon Island fell to the British on 4 February, followed by Fort Bourbon and Fort Royal, and on 23 February by the whole island of Martinique. Shipley received the thanks of both houses of parliament. 
In February 1810 Shipley commanded the 2nd division of the army in the successful operations against Guadeloupe. Brigadier-General Harcourt, in his dispatch of 7 February, expressed his indebtedness to Shipley during the operations, and especially in the action of 3 February at Ridge Beaupaire, St Louis, in front of Bellair. 
Shipley was promoted major-general on 4 June 1811. On 27 February 1813 he was appointed governor of the island of Grenada. His administration was reportedly mild and just, and he dispelled those party feuds to which small colonies were prone. 
After Bonaparte's return from Elba, a naval and military expedition, under Admiral Sir Philip Durham and Lieutenant-General Sir James Leith, was sent to secure the French West Indian islands for Louis XVIII, from whom they had revolted, and in June 1815 Martinique and Marie Galante were reoccupied without trouble. Guadeloupe, however, held out for Bonaparte (by then a British prisoner sailing to St Helena), and did not yield without fighting -- the last between Bonaparte's troops and the allies. The British attacked on 8 and 9 August 1815, and Shipley commanded the 1st brigade. The enemy were defeated with few British casualties. Following negotiations, on 10 August Guadeloupe surrendered. Both naval and military commanders in their dispatches highly praised the 'distinguished and indefatigable engineer' Sir Charles Shipley. He received, by the command of the prince regent, a medal for Martinique with a clasp for Guadeloupe. 
A skilful engineer and soldier, Shipley in July 1815 declined promotion out of the corps of Royal Engineers, of which he was senior regimental colonel, preferring to wait for his battalion. Ever careless of personal exposure, excessive fatigue at the attack on Guadeloupe apparently brought on an illness which ended in his death, at St George, Grenada, on 30 November 1815. He was buried in the church of St George's, Grenada. 
His widow died at Boulogne (where she was granted a residence by Louis XVIII for her husband's services in the French West Indies) on 6 August 1820. Their youngest daughter, Elizabeth Cole (died 1828), married in 1809 Henry David Erskine, twelfth earl of Buchan. 


@@@@@


doc= 25409


Conway Shipley (1782-1808), entered the navy in 1793 as a midshipman under Thomas Pakenham on the 'Invincible', and served on that ship at the battle on the 'glorious' 1 June 1794. After service on the frigate 'Phoebe' under Sir Robert Barlow he was commissioned lieutenant in 1800, and in 1804, when in command of the corvette HMS 'Hippomenes', captured a French privateer, 'L'Egyptienne', of much greater tonnage. He was consequently made post captain and commanded the frigate 'Nymphe' in the Tagus expedition under Sir Charles Cotton. He was killed in a cutting-out expedition on the Tagus on 23 April 1808. A monument was erected on the river bank by his fellow officers. Shipley's fifth son, the Revd Charles Shipley (1783-1834), was deprived of his fellowship at All Souls, Oxford, in 1810, despite a charge of assault with indecency against an Oxford bookseller's boy failing at the Oxford Lent assizes in 1809; he was rector of Mappowder, Dorset, from 1814. Charles Shipley's fourth son was Orby Shipley. 


@@@@@


doc= 25410


Naylor, Francis Hare- (1753-1815), historian, was the grandson of Francis Hare, bishop of Chichester, and the eldest son of Robert Hare-Naylor (died 1797) of Herstmonceux, Sussex, canon of Winchester, and his first wife, Sarah, daughter of Lister Selman of Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire. His mother died when he was a child, and his father then married Henrietta Henckell, who sold the family properties in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Hampshire, and eventually persuaded her husband to consent to the demolition of Herstmonceux Castle, so that a modern house could be built, and settled upon her own children. Francis Hare-Naylor had a small inheritance from his mother and, being unhappy at home, lived almost entirely in London, where he made friends with Charles James Fox and became one of the circle that gathered round Georgiana Cavendish, duchess of Devonshire, at Chiswick. He was introduced by the duchess to her cousin Georgiana Shipley (c.1755-1806), painter, fourth daughter of Jonathan Shipley (1713-1788), bishop of St Asaph, and his wife, Anna Maria Mordaunt (1716/17-1803), niece of the earl of Peterborough. Georgiana was described as 'tall, handsome, and self-sufficient, a scholar, and a painter' (Leslie and Taylor, 376). She was a friend and pupil of Sir Joshua Reynolds and 'exhibited with applause' (ibid.) at the Royal Academy in 1781, where she showed a portrait of a lady and two children. The duchess took every opportunity to bring her cousin and Hare-Naylor together, and Bishop Shipley was at last persuaded to invite him to his residence at Twyford, Hampshire. The following day he was arrested for debt while driving in the episcopal coach with Georgiana and her parents. Banned from the house, he disguised himself as a beggar, and met her while driving with her family. Her recognition of him produced a crisis. The bishop refused to assist Hare-Naylor, but the duchess of Devonshire gave him and Georgiana an annuity of $200; they were married on 14 November 1784. 
The couple then travelled to Karlsruhe, and afterwards to the north of Italy. Here they had four sons and a daughter, including Augustus William Hare and Julius Charles Hare. The family eventually settled at Bologna where Georgiana devoted herself to painting and formed a friendship with Clotilda Tambroni, the eminent professor of Greek. 
In 1797 Hare-Naylor's father died. It was found that his intention of leaving everything to his second wife was frustrated by her having built her new house of Herstmonceux Place upon entailed land. The Hare-Naylors therefore departed for England, leaving three of their children in the care of Clotilda Tambroni and Father Emmanuele Aponte, an old Spanish priest, and appointing the famous Mezzofanti as tutor of their eldest son. 
The Hare-Naylors settled at Herstmonceux, but were plagued by financial problems. Hare-Naylor's democratic principles made enemies and lost friends. He indignantly rejected the offer of a baronetcy. From 1799 (when the Hare-Naylors returned to Italy to fetch their children) life became an increasing struggle with the requirements of an impoverished estate. Hare-Naylor turned to writing as a source of income. However, his plays 'The Mirror' and 'The Age of Chivalry' were rejected at Drury Lane. In 1801 he published his 'History of the Helvetic Republics', which was also a disappointment, although it passed into a second enlarged edition in 1809. The family was only saved from severe financial trouble by the intervention and help of Georgiana's sister, Anna Maria, widow of the orientalist Sir William Jones. 
In 1804 Hare-Naylor and his family left Herstmonceux for ever, and moved to Weimar, attracted partly by its famous literary society, but more by the friendship of the reigning duchess, who paid daily visits to Georgiana. While at Weimar, Hare-Naylor published the novel 'Theodore, or, The Enthusiast', for which John Flaxman made a series of illustrations. On 6 April 1806 (Easter Sunday) Georgiana Hare-Naylor, blind from the age of forty-eight, died at Lausanne. In the following year Hare-Naylor sold the family estate at Herstmonceux. In the same year he married a relative of his first wife; the couple had two sons and a daughter, Georgina, who later married the theologian Frederick Denison Maurice. In September 1814 Hare-Naylor left England for the continent and in 1815 he died, after a lingering illness, at Tours. He was buried beneath the altar of Herstmonceux church. His best-known work, 'The Civil and Military History of Germany', was published posthumously in 1816. 


@@@@@


doc= 25411


Shipley, Jonathan (1713-1788), bishop of St Asaph, was baptized in the united parishes of St Stephen Walbrook and St Benet Sherehog, London, on 2 October 1713. It is likely that his birth (in London) preceded this date by only a few days. He was the second, and eldest surviving, son of Jonathan Shipley (1676-1719), stationer, of London, and of Martha Davies (died 1757) of Twyford House, Hampshire. His younger brother William Shipley was subsequently the founder of the Royal Society of Arts. Shipley was briefly apprenticed as a stationer (Allen, 137, n. 16) and after attending a school at Reading he won a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, in 1731. Having migrated to Christ Church he graduated BA in 1735; three years later he graduated MA and took holy orders. In a career move of decisive importance he became tutor to the family of Charles Mordaunt, third earl of Peterborough, and on 1 September 1743 he married the latter's niece, Anna Maria Mordaunt (1716/17-1803). She was celebrated in youth for her beauty and had served as a maid of honour to Queen Caroline ('GM', 1st ser., 13, 1743, 498; Hare, 1.89). They had one son, William Davies Shipley, who was later appointed dean of St Asaph, and five daughters. 
Shipley proceeded to acquire substantial ecclesiastical preferment. In 1743 Bishop Benjamin Hoadly appointed him a prebend of Winchester and used his influence to secure him the rectorships of Silchester and of Sherborne St John, Hampshire. In 1745 he served as chaplain-general to the army of William, duke of Cumberland, in the continental campaign that included the defeat at Fontenoy. In 1748 he was made DD at Oxford and a canon of Christ Church. In June 1760 he was appointed dean of Winchester and rector of Chilbolton, Hampshire. In retaining his other livings he was not the only Anglican clergyman who found pluralism to be entirely consistent with latitudinarian principles. During the ministry of Augustus Fitzroy, third duke of Grafton (1768-70), Shipley advanced to the bench. He was consecrated bishop of Llandaff in February 1769 and was translated to St Asaph the following September. At this point he relinquished his other livings with the exception of Chilbolton. 
In the House of Lords, Shipley gradually associated with the followers of William Pitt, earl of Chatham, in their criticisms of the administration of Lord North. An 'address to the reader' in Shipley's 'Works' claims that the parliamentary opposition was 'a set of men to whom he was a perfect stranger, but who appeared to him to understand, and pursue the true interests of their country' (2.61). During the 1770s he became very friendly with Benjamin Franklin, whose opinions on the American question he shared, and with the radical dissenters Joseph Priestley and Richard Price ('Papers', 29.147-9, 407-9, 635-7). In 1773 he preached before the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel a sermon in which he described North America as 'the only great nursery of freemen left on the face of the earth' ('Works', 2.191-2). The sermon was praised by Franklin, and Chatham declared himself 'charmed and edified' by it ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 4.302). In 1774, in a speech prepared for the Lords but not delivered, Shipley was strongly critical of the bill for altering the Massachusetts charter, declaring 'arbitrary taxation is plunder authorized by law' and 'There are methods of making reasonable concessions, and yet without injuring our dignity.' Without condoning the Boston Tea Party he praised the colonists as 'coheirs of liberty with ourselves' ('Works', 2.161, 179, 181, 187). At the same time he displayed his latitudinarianism by sympathy with the dissenters. Although in 1772 he voted against the dissenters' bill for relief for their ministers and schoolmasters from the rigours of subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and did not support a similar bill the following year, he spoke in favour of a third relief bill, which was passed in 1779 (Ditchfield, 64, 68-9). In a speech that was widely reported he claimed that the bill did not go far enough and that all legislation against the dissenters should be repealed ('Works', 2.233-5). He was present in the Lords on 7 April 1778 and witnessed the collapse of Chatham. However, the opposition was consistently outvoted in the Lords as well as in the Commons until the disaster of Yorktown led to the fall of North's ministry in March 1782. 
Shipley appeared to be in high favour with the new administration of Rockingham and Shelburne. He urged Shelburne to adhere to his 'good principles and your generous views for the public service', adding: 'If you find yourself entangled and embarrassed, like Lord Chatham, in Court artifices, break through the mercenary chains at once, and assert your liberty and honour' (Hare, 1.87). He urged Shelburne to retain his alliance with Rockingham. In July 1782 Charles James Fox told the duke of Grafton that Rockingham had been 'quite decided that Bishops Shipley and Hinchcliffe should have the offer of any opening that presented itself' (A. H. Fitzroy, duke of Grafton, 'Autobiography', ed. W. R. Anson, 1898, 329). Horace Walpole expected Shipley to be offered the see of Salisbury (Brown, 324) but Rockingham died on 1 July 1782 and Shipley seems to have quarrelled with Shelburne. None the less when the death of Frederick Cornwallis created a vacancy at Canterbury early in 1783 it was widely believed that Shipley was a serious candidate and there is evidence that Shelburne solicited George III in his favour (Sykes, 400). The king, however, disapproved of Shipley's political opinions, and the archbishopric was ultimately conferred upon John Moore. Shipley, like Richard Watson of Llandaff, received no further translation. 
Thereafter Shipley's attendance in the Lords became more intermittent. He did not vote in the crucial divisions over the 'India Bill' in December 1783 that brought down the Fox-North coalition. In 1787 he was one of only two bishops who, at a private meeting summoned by Pitt to consider an application from the dissenters, favoured the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' (Sykes, 341). He shared many of the liberal opinions of Sir William Jones, who married Shipley's daughter Anna Maria and on whose behalf Shipley gave a warm recommendation to Pitt. He maintained a general commitment to mild parliamentary and economic reform, published a relatively small number of sermons, was admired in dissenting circles, and enjoyed a convivial social life at his London residence and at the bishop's palace at St Asaph. Despite their differences over America he also enjoyed the friendship of Samuel Johnson, who had visited him at St Asaph in 1774 and described him as 'knowing and conversible'. He belonged to the Literary Club and was on easy social terms with Edmund Burke and Sir Joshua Reynolds. Hannah More recalled a lively evening in his company and that of Horace Walpole (Walpole, 'Corr.', 31.211). He and his daughter Georgiana kept up an affectionate correspondence with Franklin. 
Shipley died at Chilbolton on 6 December 1788 after an 'apoplectic seizure' and was buried at Twyford. There is a monument in Twyford church. The 'Gentleman's Magazine', which reported that he died at his London house in Bolton Row, Piccadilly, described him as possessing 'learning without pedantry, patriotism without faction and politeness without affectation' ('GM', 1179). He was survived by his wife, who died on 9 March 1803. Shipley was a man of considerable intellectual gifts, although his published works (despite the two-volume edition published in 1792) were not extensive. Within the Church of England he was a conscientious pastor, according to his own lights and those of his age. He conducted his diocesan visitations regularly and dutifully. Although adhering to orthodox Anglican doctrines he was unperturbed by the development of trinitarian heterodoxy and shared the optimistic assumption that truth would prevail in a free intellectual climate. In political terms he represented an Erastian form of whiggery that had passed from fashion during his later years. In declaring (1779) that religious toleration was a matter for the state rather than the church he showed himself to be an apt pupil of Hoadly. Even before the French Revolution his opinions were becoming marginalized among the Anglican hierarchy. 


@@@@@


doc= 25412


Shipley, William (bap. 1715, d. 1803), founder of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, was baptized on 2 June 1715 at St Stephen Walbrook, London. He was the third son of Jonathan Shipley (1676-1719), a native of Leeds and a citizen and stationer of London, and Martha Shipley (died 1757), daughter of William Davies (1658-1727) of Twyford in Hampshire. His oldest surviving brother was Bishop Jonathan Shipley. Brought up by his mother and grandfather at Twyford he received nine years of grammatical schooling from about 1725 to about 1734 and was then apprenticed for seven years to the painter Charles Phillips, who lived and worked in Great Queen Street, London. Shipley frequented Old Slaughter's Coffee House in St Martin's Lane, which was a favourite resort of the leading artists of the time. In 1741 he obtained a place as a gentleman pensioner at arms but resigned from it after four years because its rules forbade him to practise as a professional artist. He then travelled the country drawing perspective views of noblemen's and gentlemen's estates before settling as a teacher of drawing and painting in Northampton in 1747. 
Shipley was warmly welcomed into the Northampton Philosophical Society, 'the Royal Society in miniature', as he called it (W. Shipley to H. Baker, 18 Oct 1747, English MSS 19, 3, 154), on account of his friendship with Henry Baker FRS FSA, to whom he communicated matters of interest to the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries. He also gained support for a philanthropic scheme to buy winter fuel for the poor of Northampton in 1751 and for his 'Proposals for raising by subscription a fund to be distributed in premiums for the promoting of improvements in liberal arts and sciences, manufactures, etc', a broadsheet pamphlet which he eventually published in June 1753. Soon afterwards, on Baker's advice he went to London and published his 'Scheme for putting the proposals in execution modelled partly from the plan used by the Dublin Society' (7 December 1753). Two original features of his 'Scheme' were that women as well as men could become members of the proposed society, and that medals could be given for especially valuable inventions and improvements, or as honorary awards. Through the clergyman-scientist Stephen Hales DD FRS Shipley met lords Folkestone and Romney, two influential peers who were already considering a scheme to award artists and inventors. After an extensive and largely fruitless canvass, a meeting took place at Rawthmell's Coffee House, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, on 22 March 1754. Only ten persons besides Shipley, who acted as secretary, were present, but they confidently announced the foundation of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce and offered rewards for the discovery of cobalt, the raising and curing of madder, and for the best drawings by boys and girls ['see 'Founders of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce]. In February 1755 Shipley sub-let two rooms to the society in a house he had rented in Craig's Court, Charing Cross, and in June 1756 he moved with the constantly expanding institution to John Fielding's house in Castle Court, Strand, and was briefly in residence in the magnificent premises designed for the society in 1759 by William Chambers. 
Shipley remained secretary of the Society of Arts until 1757 and was its register (or curator) from 1757 to 1760. He had been elected a perpetual member in 1755 and received the honorary gold medal in 1758. After 1760 he remained active as a member. In 1762 he proposed, without success, the establishment of a 'repository of arts', but his scheme to increase the national supply of fish by stocking (1763) resulted in the society offering premiums for the establishment of scallop-beds. Even after he retired to Maidstone in 1768 he frequently travelled to London to attend meetings of committees of the society. He received the honorary silver medal in 1777 'for his invention of a floating light'. His method of insulating shoes from the damp by the use of tin foil (1781) and his improved gardening tools (1787) received the thanks of the society. An ambitious proposal to reform teaching methods resulted in the society's offer of a premium for teaching languages, and an award to Dr James Egan of Greenwich in 1787. On 1 July 1803, six months before his death, a ceremonial tribute was paid to Shipley at the society's prize-giving ceremony. 
From 1754 to 1761 Shipley conducted a drawing school, first sharing premises with the Society of Arts and then at Beaufort Buildings in the Strand, where he rented a magnificent Great Room measuring 65 by 30 feet. Many artists of distinction were trained by him, including Richard Cosway, Ozias Humphry, John Hamilton Mortimer, Joseph Nollekens, and William Pars. The latter, with his brother Henry Pars, continued to manage the school after Shipley's retirement. In November 1767 he married Elizabeth Miller ('c'.1730-1806) at St George's, Hanover Square, and within a year was settled in Maidstone, Kent, where his friend and patron Lord Romney had his country seat. He made friends with his neighbours the Peale family, and his only surviving offspring, Elizabeth (1771-1836), married Richard Peale junior. He was a member of the masonic Lodge of Fortitude and was the treasurer and probably the founder of the Maidstone Society for Promoting Useful Knowledge. Lord Romney was president and Benjamin Franklin, Arthur Young, and Richard Cosway were honorary members. In 1783 Shipley assisted the Maidstone Society's efforts to combat the outbreak of fever in the county goal and in 1786 he published his 'Proposal to Establish a Society for Promoting Useful Knowledge in the County of Kent', which led to the expansion of the Maidstone Society. In spite of his advancing years Shipley was active in the enlarged organization. In 1791 he was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society of London and in 1795 he served on the governing committee of the reformed Kentish Society. In 1796 he resigned from the Linnean Society 'having scarce been in London since that time [his election]' (W. Shipley to T. Marsham, 9 May 1796, 'Linn. Soc.'). 
Shipley was known for his taciturnity and absent-mindedness. The miniature by William Hincks (1786), and the earlier portraits by James Barry ('c'.1779) and Richard Cosway (exh. Royal Society of Arts, 1760), confirm Joseph Moser's description of him as having 'something of the heavy appearance of the late Dr Johnson'. Yet, continued Moser, 'under this unpromising aspect he possessed a most benevolent heart, joined to an inquisitive, intelligent and highly cultivated mind' (Moser, 176). His oil painting entitled 'A Boy Blowing a Firebrand' after Schalcken ('c'.1751) and his miniature portrait of Henry Baker (before 1766) suggest that he was skilled at copying but hesitant at portraits. His landscape pictures remain untraced. Shipley probably retired from public life during the last eight years of his life. He died at Knightrider House, his home in Maidstone, on 28 December 1803, aged eighty-nine, and was buried at All Saints' Church, Maidstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 25413


Shipley, William Davies (1745-1826), Church of England clergyman, was born on 5 October 1745 at Midgham, Berkshire, the only son among the six children of Dr Jonathan Shipley (1713-1788), bishop of St Asaph, and his wife, Anna Maria, 'nee' Mordaunt (1716/17-1803), and nephew of William Shipley. He was educated at Westminster School under William Markham and then at Winchester College; he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 21 December 1763, from where he graduated BA on 19 January 1769 and MA in 1771. 
Shipley was ordained priest and followed his father's example in rapidly accumulating benefices in plurality. As the new bishop of St Asaph, Jonathan Shipley appointed his son vicar of Ysgeifiog on 19 March 1770. Other livings in that diocese soon followed, including the vicarage of Wrexham, Denbighshire, on 6 February 1771 and the sinecure rectory of Llangwn on 11 April 1772, which Shipley exchanged first for Corwen (1774-82) and subsequently for Llanarmon yn Ial (1782-1816). He was additionally appointed chancellor of the St Asaph diocese in 1773 and named dean of the cathedral on 27 May 1774, and held all these posts until his death. They were collectively worth more than $2000 p.a. in the early 1780s. He married, on 28 April 1777, Penelope (died 1789), elder daughter and coheir of Ellis Yonge of Byrn Yorkin, near Wrexham, and next of kin to Sir John Conway, third and last baronet, her maternal great-grandfather. The Conways' holdings included Rhuddlan Castle and a sugar plantation in St Kitt's. The marriage made the Shipleys one of the wealthiest families in north Wales. 
Shipley gained national notice from his involvement in a seditious libel case that drew attention to his own whiggish politics as well as his obstinacy. In August 1782 William Jones (who married Shipley's sister Anna Maria in April 1783) published anonymously, under the auspices of the Society for Constitutional Information, a reformist political tract called 'The Principles of Government, in a Dialogue between a Scholar and a Peasant'. As chairman of the Flintshire Association and Correspondence (for parliamentary reform) Shipley publicly read a copy of Jones's pamphlet at the county meeting of 7 January 1783 without previously familiarizing himself with its contents, and carried a resolution that it be translated into Welsh. However, once he had been privately advised that the proposal might be misinterpreted the project was dropped. 
The Flintshire committee had already been criticized for its initial approbation of Jones's pamphlet, and Shipley now committed the tactical error of rushing to its defence. On 24 January 1783 he took a copy of the 'Dialogue' and with his own hand substituted throughout the words 'gentleman' and 'farmer' for 'scholar' and 'peasant'. He then asked his curate at Wrexham to have a few copies of the amended tract reprinted by a Wrexham bookseller. His precipitate action brought down all the wrath of his political opponents on his head. At a county meeting in March 1783 the high sheriff of Flintshire, Thomas Fitzmaurice (brother of the recent prime minister, William Petty, earl of Shelburne), castigated Shipley as a preacher of sedition, and travelled to London to request his prosecution by the government for seditious libel. The law officers refused to act but Fitzmaurice, undeterred, proceeded privately. Shipley was indicted at the Wrexham great sessions in April 1783 for publishing a seditious libel. The case came for hearing at Denbighshire grand sessions, in Wrexham, in September, with Lloyd Kenyon as presiding judge and Thomas Erskine as Shipley's counsel, retained by the Society for Constitutional Information. Jones had meanwhile made known to Kenyon that he was the author of the tract, a confession that had not prevented his nomination as a judge of the supreme court of Bengal. Shipley had also complained to the Society for Constitutional Information on 16 June 1783 that he had been singled out 'for the object of a Prosecution founded on an anonymous letter, supported by anonymous abuse and lying Reports, and carried out under a false name, with the clandestine Malignity of an Informer that feels ashamed of his own malice' ('Public Advertiser', 30 July 1783). 
The Wrexham hearing having been postponed on legal grounds, the case was removed in March 1784, by a writ of 'certiorari', to the king's bench and then remitted for trial to Shrewsbury assizes, where it was finally heard before Mr Justice (Francis) Buller on 6 August 1784. Buller directed that the jury was merely to find on the fact of publication and the truth of the innuendoes as laid; whether the words constituted a libel or not was for the court. Erskine resisted this view, and the jury's initial verdict was guilty of publishing only. Buller intervened to ask them to reconsider their verdict, and following his directions the jury again decided that Shipley was guilty of publishing but did not find on the question of whether the tract was a libel or not. 
On 16 November 1784 Erskine, before the court of king's bench, argued on grounds of misdirection for a new trial, which the lord chief justice, William Murray, Baron Mansfield, refused. However, the defendant was not committed, and Erskine went on to present a motion to the court in arrest of judgment. Mansfield ruled that as the publication was abstract no part of the publication was really criminal, and the dean was discharged as a free man. The news was well received in north Wales, and bonfires were lit and houses illuminated as Shipley proceeded in December first on a visit to his father at Twyford, near Winchester, and subsequently through Shrewsbury, Wrexham, and Ruthin to Llannerch Park (his father's other seat, in Denbighshire), and then to his own residence near St Asaph. The interest that the protracted proceedings evoked -- the greatest of all trials for seditious libel, according to Holdsworth -- increased pressure from the Portland whigs in parliament to transfer the decision of what is libellous from judge to jury, a change embodied in Fox's 'Libel Act', 1792 (32 Geo. III, c.60). 
Shipley's action ended his prospects of a bishopric, made him suspect to government supporters in Flintshire, and reduced the credibility of the proponents of reform in north Wales. A vague proposal to recommence proceedings against him is mentioned in a letter addressed in the aftermath of the 1796 general election to Lord Chief Justice Kenyon by Thomas Pennant, who passes on some spiteful stories of the dean -- 'that profligate man' -- noting the extent to which Bishop Lewis Bagot was under his thumb and concluding bluntly 'the manner he has past his probation from that time [of his trial] to this, convinces everyone of his incorrigibility' ('Kenyon MSS', 545). Two months later, on 8 January 1797, Pennant was gleefully telling Kenyon about reports of a trespasser being shot by the dean on his land after a quarrel about a pig. 'Enraged, he ran after the divine with his spade, but could not overtake him. I am told the affair was made up with a sum of money' (ibid., 546). Shipley's character was always considered suspect by Pennant and other north Wales Pittites but against this view should be set his undoubted warm-heartedness (which could so readily turn into impetuousness) and the affection in which he was held by many dissenters. Throughout life he was known for his 'sincere attachment... to those liberal principles which produced the Revolution [of 1688]' ('GM', 96/2, 641). 
Shipley published little apart from a sermon for Chester Infirmary in 1790. He wrote a preface to the edition of his father's works published in 1792, in which he justified the bishop's sympathy for the American revolutionaries, but this does not appear in ordinary copies of the work. He also assisted his widowed sister in collecting the letters and other literary remains of Sir William Jones, published in 1799. Most of his energies went into maintaining St Asaph Cathedral. While he was dean the chapter house was taken down (1779) and the fabric of the cathedral repaired: the choir was rebuilt, a new episcopal throne and pulpit provided, and a reredos erected (1810). The money to pay for many of these improvements was provided by the 'St Asaph Cathedral Act' of 1814. Shipley died at his residence, Bodrhyddan, near St Asaph, on 7 May 1826. He was buried at Rhuddlan, in Denbighshire, where a tablet was raised to his memory. His wife had died in childbirth at Llannerch on 15 November 1789, leaving five sons and three daughters. 
The eldest son, William Shipley (1778-1820), was whig MP for Flint boroughs from 1807 to 1812 and for St Mawes from 1812 to 1813. He had been expected by his patrons, the Wynns and the Grenvilles, to become an effective politician but instead proved more interested in grouse, and was killed in a shooting accident; his son William, on the dean's death, assumed the name Conwy. Shipley's eldest daughter, Penelope, married Dr Pelham Warren, a prominent London physician; the second, Anna Maria, married Colonel Charles A. Dashwood; and the third, Amelia, married the Revd Reginald Heber in April 1809. It was while on a visit to his father-in-law that Heber composed, at the old vicarage, Wrexham, his popular hymn 'From Greenland's icy mountain'. Shipley's fourth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 25414


Shipman, Thomas (1632-1680), poet, the eldest son of William Shipman (1603-1658) and Sara, daughter of Alderman Parker of Nottingham, was born at Scarrington, near Newark, in November 1632, and baptized there on 8 November. The eldest of eleven or twelve children of his father's second marriage, he received his early education at Sleaford School and was admitted as a pensioner to St John's College, Cambridge, on 1 May 1651. There is no record of his having taken a degree. He married Margaret (died 'c'.1696), daughter of John Trafford, who brought him a good inheritance; they had several sons, the third of whom, William, became high sheriff of Nottingham in 1730. 
In the preface to a collection of some 200 poems which he was compiling at the time of his death, Shipman confessed that he still retained his youthful love of poetry and could see 'no cause but 'Dotage' to make it be left off'. The poet Thomas Flatman, who eventually saw the volume through the press as 'Carolina, or, Loyal Poems' (1683), informed prospective readers that his friend was 'a Man every way accomplish'd', whose conversation had recommended him to 'the best Wits of the Age'. Shipman's political sympathies are evident in poems on the royal martyr, the passing of Cromwell ('The Arch-Traitor'), the restoration of Charles II, and the virtues of the duke of Monmouth ('The Hero'). 
Having preserved the family estate by retiring from public life during the protectorate, Shipman entered into his full inheritance as a cultivated country squire after 1660, living on familiar terms with the local aristocracy and assisting Dr Robert Thoroton in his study of Nottinghamshire antiquities. He also became a captain of the trained bands in the county. Shipman's heroic tragedy, 'Henry the Third of France', performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in 1678, was designed to support Monmouth at the time of the Popish Plot. In a preface to the published text, he defends the use of rhyming couplets, generously praises 'Paradise Lost' as 'noble, strong and fanciful', and imagines 'what a 'Poem'' it might have been if Milton had not eschewed rhyme. 
Shipman died at Scarrington, where he was buried on 15 October 1680. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 25415


Shipp, John (1785-1834), army officer and author, younger son of Thomas Shipp, a marine, and his wife, Laetitia, was born at Saxmundham, Suffolk, on 16 March 1785. His mother died in poor circumstances in 1789, his elder brother was lost at sea, and John became an inmate of the parish poorhouse; he was apprenticed by the overseers to a neighbouring farmer, a brutal taskmaster, from whom he escaped by enlisting as a boy in the 22nd (Cheshire) regiment, at Colchester, on 17 January 1797. Through the kindness of his captain he picked up some education, and, after service in the Channel Islands and the Cape, sailed for India, where, having risen to be a sergeant in the grenadier company, he served against the Marathas under Lord Lake. He was one of the stormers at the capture of Dig on 24 December 1804, and three times led the forlorn hope of the storming column in the unsuccessful assaults on Bharatpur (January-February 1805). He was severely wounded, but his bravery was rewarded by Lord Lake with an ensigncy in the 65th foot. On 10 March in the same year he was gazetted lieutenant in the 76th foot. 
Returning home after two and a half years' further service, Shipp found himself forced to sell out on 19 March 1808 in order to obtain a sum (about $250) to pay his debts. After a short interval he found himself in London without a shilling, and resolved to re-enlist in the ranks. He returned to India as a private in the 24th light dragoons, and rose by 1812 to the position of regimental sergeant-major. In May 1815 the earl of Moira reappointed him to an ensigncy in the 87th (the Prince of Wales's Own) Irish regiment of foot (later Royal Irish Fusiliers), lately arrived in India from Mauritius. Shipp had thus performed the unique feat of twice winning a commission from the ranks before he was thirty-two. 
Shipp distinguished himself greatly by his bravery in the second campaign of the Anglo-Nepal War, notably in a single combat with one of the enemy's 'sirdars' near Makwanpur. He was on the staff of the left division of the 'grand army' under the marquess of Hastings in the Third Anglo-Maratha War (1817-18), and was promoted lieutenant on 5 July 1821. He seems to have been popular in his regiment for his bravery; but during 1822, while quartered at Calcutta, he was inveigled into a series of turf speculations which proved disastrous. Shipp imprudently commented in writing on the behaviour of a superior officer in regard to these transactions, and was discharged from the service by a court martial held at Fort William, Calcutta, between 14 and 27 July 1823. He was, however, recommended to mercy, 'in consideration of his past services and wounds, and the high character that he had borne as an officer and a gentleman'. When he sold out, on 3 November 1825, the East India Company granted him a pension of $50, upon which he settled near Ealing, Middlesex. 
Shipp then wrote his successful 'Memoirs of the Extraordinary Military Career of John Shipp' (1829 and later editions), in which he refrained from recriminations. In 1831 he published 'Flogging and its Substitute: a Voice from the Ranks', in the form of a letter to Sir Francis Burdett, an indictment of the 'cat', which, as he claimed, 'flogged one devil out and fifty devils in'. Burdett sent him $50, and most of his suggestions were later adopted by the military authorities. In 1830 Shipp was offered an inspectorship in the Stepney division of the new Metropolitan Police by Sir Charles Rowan; he was shortly afterwards appointed superintendent of the night watch at Liverpool, and in 1833 was elected master of the workhouse at Liverpool, where he was reportedly highly esteemed. He died at Liverpool, in comfortable circumstances, on 27 April 1834, and was buried in Liverpool. 
Shipp was married twice, first, in 1816 in Cawnpore, to Anne. She died in 1823 or 1824, in childbirth, aged twenty-two, and the two sons from the marriage were adopted. Shipp remarried, probably in 1826. There were children from the second marriage. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25416


Shippard, Alexander (1771-1841), naval officer, was born on 3 March 1771, the youngest son of Alexander Shippard (died 1803), a purser in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Margaret Walkinshaw. The father was with Horatio Nelson in the 'Vanguard' in 1798 and received a medal for the battle of Abu Qir Bay. The younger Shippard entered the navy in 1786 on the 'Irresistible', bearing the broad pennant of Sir Andrew Snape Hamond. From 1788 to 1792 he served in the 'Scipio', 'Bellerophon', and 'Vengeance' -- all in the English Channel. In 1792 he went out to Newfoundland in the 'Assistance', and on 23 October 1793 he was promoted lieutenant in command of the tender 'Placentia'. In 1795 and 1796 he served in the storeship 'Camel' in the Mediterranean; in 1797 he took command of the 'Monarch' and cut out vessels off Texel, the Netherlands; subsequently, to 1801, he was in the 'Montagu', for the most part in the Mediterranean but afterwards in the West Indies. 
In 1801-2 Shippard was in the 'Monarch' in the North Sea, and in 1803 he commanded the cutter 'Admiral Mitchell' (12 guns) attached to the fleet under Lord Keith to guard the narrow seas. On 21 August 1803 he landed Georges Cadoudal, the Chouan leader, at Biville, between Dieppe and Treport, and on 16 January the following year he landed the French general Pichegru at the same place. On 31 October 1803, with the advanced squadron off Boulogne, he ran inshore and engaged a gun-brig in charge of six sloops, some of which were armed. After an action of two and a half hours, during which the squadron was prevented by the contrary wind from giving him assistance, he drove the brig and one of the sloops on shore. Following Keith's report on this, Shippard received a sword of honour from the patriotic fund at Lloyd's and was promoted commander on 3 March 1804. He was later appointed to the 'Hornet' in the West Indies. 
In 1805 Shippard commanded the 'Surinam' in the Mediterranean, and on 22 January 1806 he was advanced to post rank. In May 1807 he was appointed to the 'Banterer' (22 guns), which, by the culpable negligence of the lieutenant of the middle watch and of the master who both went to drink grog in the gun room, was lost in the St Lawrence River on the night of 29 October 1808. The court martial found that Shippard had made every possible exertion to save the ship, and afterwards to preserve the stores. He was acquitted of all blame and was shortly afterwards appointed to the 'Namur' (74 guns), flagship of Vice-Admiral Thomas Wells at the Nore. In 1812-13 he commanded the 'Asia' (74 guns) in the North Sea. He had no further service but became rear-admiral on 28 June 1838, received a pension for meritorious service, and died at Malta on 4 April 1841. Shippard married Jane, daughter of Admiral Sir John Knight, and they had at least one child. 
Shippard's elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 25417


William Shippard (1764-1856), naval officer, was born on 17 February 1764 near Bo'ness, Linlithgowshire, and entered the navy on the 'Medea' in June 1778. He was on the 'Nonsuch' in the West Indies in 1782 and served in the battle of 9 April. In August 1797 he was at the blockade of Cadiz, under Lord St Vincent, and in the subsequent battle. In 1801 he served in the battle of Copenhagen. He was advanced to post rank and placed on the retired list in 1846, and died, without children, on 6 July 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 25418


Robert Shippen (bap. 1675, d. 1745), college head, who was baptized at Prestbury, Cheshire, on 27 July 1675. He was educated at Stockport grammar school, matriculated from Merton College, Oxford, on 6 April 1693, and graduated BA in 1696. He then became a fellow of Brasenose, from where, having served as a tutor for several years and proceeded MA in 1699, he was elected professor of music at Gresham College in 1705 and fellow of the Royal Society a year later. In 1710 he returned to Brasenose as principal, resigning his professorship in favour of his brother Edward (1671-1724), and was created DD. In the same year he married Frances, Lady Clerke (died 1728), the widowed daughter of Richard Legh of Lyme. He was presented successively to the rectories of Great Billing, Northamptonshire (1710), Whitechapel, London (1716), and Amersham, Buckinghamshire (1744). Allegedly chosen head of house by a body of slothful fellows anxious to avoid disruptive change, he became 'well known as an overbearing tyrant within the walls of his college' (Bennett, 149), and was soon embroiled in university politics, being engaged as an ally by Atterbury, then dean of Christ Church, in his bid to break the dominance of William Lancaster, the provost of Queen's. He was vice-chancellor from 1718 to 1723 and died on 24 November 1745 at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 25419


Shippen, William (bap. 1673, d. 1743), politician and Jacobite sympathizer, was baptized at Prestbury, Cheshire, on 30 July 1673, the second son of the parish priest, William Shippen. Educated first under Roger Dale at Stockport grammar school, on 16 July 1687, aged fourteen, he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, as a commoner. Barely a year after his matriculation, however, he moved from the university to be elected a king's scholar at Westminster, where he came under the influence of Richard Busby. He was admitted a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 26 June 1691 and became a scholar there in 1692 before going to the Middle Temple in 1693. He graduated BA in 1694 and was called to the bar in 1699. 
The early years of Queen Anne's reign witnessed a growing polarization of the English political nation and saw Shippen working hard to establish his reputation as a tory polemicist. His first literary effort, a verse satire published in 1704 with the title 'Faction Display'd', depicted the junto lords as the traitorous Catiline conspirators. This jibe won the accolade of a paragraph-by-paragraph rebuttal from whig hacks, prompting Shippen to follow up his success with a second poem, 'Moderation Display'd'. Both pamphlets ran into several editions and marked their author out as a promising candidate for political advancement. His literary output was not sustained, but in 1732 he did publish a defence of Charles I's conduct in which he sought to vindicate Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion'. Shippen first entered parliament as the tory member for Bramber in Sussex, which he represented from 1707 to 1713 on the interest of Lord Plymouth, whose son, Dixie Windsor, later became his brother-in-law. Although he possessed little patrimony of his own, on 17 July 1712 he married Frances Stote (died 1747), the daughter and coheir of Sir Richard Stote of Jesmond Hall, Northumberland, with whom he acquired a fortune of $70,000. In the following year he was returned on the Buller-Carew interest at Saltash in Cornwall, but, being hard pressed by the duke of Wharton's interest there, in 1715 he prevailed upon another brother-in-law, the nonjuring Peter Legh of Lyme, to be returned at his Lancashire pocket borough of Newton, which he represented at Westminster for the remainder of his life. 
In the House of Commons, Shippen became identified as a zealous party man and useful speaker on contentious issues. Following establishment of the tory ministry in 1710 he emerged as a prominent member of the October Club, and a year later he was elected one of the seven commissioners of public accounts set up to discredit the previous whig administration by means of an inquiry into the alleged financial irregularities of the duke of Marlborough. He was a strong proponent of the occasional conformity and schism bills, and in August 1714 stood out brazenly against the offer of a reward for the Pretender's capture. By the time of the queen's death later that month the tory party had become deeply divided; but in the short term, far from resorting to the standard of 'King James', most of its representatives in parliament competed fiercely with their whig enemies to pass 'loyal and lucrative legislation on behalf of her Hanoverian successor' (Colley, 26). Shippen, for example, seconded a motion by Horace Walpole for the payment of arrears to the Hanoverian troops who had fought in the War of the Spanish Succession, offering the ingenuous admission that 'he had opposed that payment in the late reign, but... was for it now' (ibid.). 
But such dalliance with the new regime was to be short-lived. As early as April 1715 Shippen was warning his patron Legh that 'all our Letters are opened in defyance of an Act of Parliament' (Shippen to Legh, 13 April 1715, JRL, Legh of Lyme MSS). Following the arrest of Edward Harvey in September on charges of treasonable correspondence, and the latter's attempted suicide while in prison, a report began circulating in London that Shippen himself had 'given Information at the Secret Office ag[ains]t several Persons, s[ai]d to be concerned in a Plot & an intended Invasion from abroad' obliging him to post a personal denial at the Royal Exchange ('Declaration of William Shippen'). Thereafter, a combination of the earl of Oxford's arrest and committal to the Tower, the flights of Bolingbroke and Ormond to St Germain, the sweeping governmental victories at the general election of 1715, and the proscription of rank-and-file tories from both national and local office following the failure of the Jacobite rising did much to harden partisan attitudes and determine future dynastic loyalties. 
Shippen's own reaction to these events was to identify himself unequivocally with the small band of those prepared to work actively for a second Stuart restoration. Although he was ready to write whips soliciting the attendance of tory colleagues at Westminster and to raise funds for the Jacobite cause, his main value was as a parliamentary performer. While not a first-rate orator by reason of his low voice and a tendency to cover his mouth with his glove, for more than a quarter of a century 'honest Shippen' raked and harried successive whig ministries with his sometimes intemperately anti-Hanoverian rhetoric, thereby emerging as principal spokesman for the motley crew of parliamentary Jacobites who continued to oppose Hanoverian rule. He was forthright in his opposition to the 'Septennial Bill' and the 'Mutiny Bill', spoke vehemently against repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts', and on 4 December 1717 was committed to the Tower for a provocative speech in a committee on the 'Army Supply Bill', the house resolving that he had used words which were 'highly dishonourable to, and unjustly reflecting on, his Majesty's Person & Government'. He was charged with having referred to the king's speech as 'rather... calculated for the Meridian of Germany, then for Great Britain', and to King George himself as 'a Stranger to our Language and Constitution' ('Mr Shippen's case'). Despite being implicated also in the ill-starred Gyllenborg plot, he was soon at large once more, subdued but in unrepentant mood. By March 1718 he was assuring the Pretender that all of his commands would be obeyed 'with the utmost pleasure as well as fidelity' ('Stuart Papers', 6.260). In fact, throughout the whig schism of 1717 to 1720, and the South Sea fiasco which brought it to an end, he worked diligently to prevent the emergence of a mixed ministry of the type that had been common in the two preceding reigns. Indeed, his services in this regard, so the Pretender was informed, could 'never be sufficiently acknowledged' (ibid., 5.558). 
Shippen was also persuaded to act as the main channel of communication between the English and Scottish Jacobites, and in the late summer of 1721 he met with George Lockhart in Newcastle to work out the logistics of their correspondence. The two men further discussed the approaches lately made by Lord Sunderland to the English tories, who, according to Shippen, had resolved 'to enter into no concert with any of the two contending powers at Court, but to stick together and wait till it pleased God some event might occurr, that would give them occasion to doe [King James] and the country service' ('Letters of George Lockhart', 161-6). In the event, Sunderland's premature death and Robert Walpole's emergence as first minister temporarily reunited most of the whigs in parliament, eliminated whatever slim chance there might have been for a parliamentary restoration, and set the scene for another round of plotting and intrigue. 
In the longer term, however, scarcely veiled attacks on the king and his ministers combined with a principled hostility to political compromise were bound to prove a self-defeating strategy -- one that played increasingly into the hands of Walpole and his associates who used Shippen's all-too-public displays of disaffection to damn all tories as Jacobites and foment mistrust between the whig and tory elements of the patriot opposition beginning to emerge in parliament. Temporary truces between Jacobites and Hanoverian tories were occasionally possible. For example, with a major row brewing at the prospect of a tobacco excise, the 1733 session opened with an attack on the king's address by all members of the opposition as part of a concerted thrust against the ministry. Typically forthright, Shippen's speech of 16 January made ominous references to 'Jealousies and Suspicions without Doors'. There was, he told the house, such a general spirit abroad that it could not: 'be ascribed to any one Set of Men: They cannot be branded with the Name of Jacobites or of Republicans. No; the whole People of 'England' seem to be united in this Spirit of Jealousy and Opposition; and it ought not to be entirely neglected. ('GM', 1st ser., 3, 1733, 393)' In 1734 Shippen again distinguished himself, speaking forcefully in debates on the address, the Seville treaty, the army, and the 'Septennial Act'; but, with the excise crisis and general elections passed, he showed himself determined once more to prize open fissures within the opposition's ranks. In February 1737 he was among forty-five tory MPs who absented themselves from the division on Pulteney's motion to increase Prince Frederick's allowance, as much perhaps from a distrust of the prince and an unwillingness to be seen coercing the Hanoverian monarchy as from any explicit motives of Jacobitism. Yet, despite the libertarian rhetoric which he frequently used in debates, it would be wrong to view Shippen as either a 'pioneer of constitutional opposition' or as a proto-democrat. His purpose throughout was to advance the Stuart cause by any means that seemed likely to prove effective. 
As an associate of Francis Atterbury, the Jacobite bishop of Rochester, Shippen was perhaps fortunate not to be taken up in 1722 for complicity in the Atterbury plot. This, together with his sojourn in the Tower in 1717, may well explain his reluctance to commit himself when approached to engage in real business by the Pretender's emissary, who came to England in 1740 to canvass support for a rising of English Jacobites backed by French troops. The agent found King James's friends 'more timorous and backward than heretofore, and yet as full of good inclinations as ever'. It was, he reported, 'impossible to form any plan of business with them; they shudder at the thought of an attempt when they find it can be compass'd, and yet wish it, and even seem to long for it'. While some remained hearty enough, Shippen in particular, he noted, 'trembles, and infuses his fears into the gentlemen to whom the King [that is, James Stuart] wrote' (Sempil to James Stuart, 28 March 1740, 'Stuart Papers', 221/109). Consequently, he would be left out of future consultations altogether. 
In February 1741 Shippen was among the tory members who quit the house rather than vote for Samuel Sandys's motion addressing the king for Walpole's removal, and afterwards could scarcely conceal his contempt for the patriot whigs: 'Robin and I are two honest men, he is for King George and I for King James; but those men with the long cravats [meaning Sandys and his associates] only desire places either under King George or King James' (HoP, 'Commons'). He would not, he asserted, 'pull down Robin on republican principles' (ibid.). His last recorded speech in the House of Commons was in February 1742 against the army estimates which were adopted without a division, 'Shippen alone', as Horace Walpole observed, 'unchanged and opposing' (ibid.). 
Shippen died, childless, at his Norfolk Street home on 1 May 1743, leaving his small estate to be divided between his brothers Robert and John. He was buried at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 7 May. His misanthropic widow lived separately at Richmond and died on 22 August 1747. 
William's eldest surviving brother was 


@@@@@


doc= 25420


Shipton, Mother (supp. fl. 1530), supposed witch and prophetess, is a mostly legendary figure. The only historical support for her existence as a woman living in Tudor York is found in the slim pamphlet 'The Prophesie of Mother Shipton in the Raigne of King Henry the Eighth' (1641), which opens with an account of the prediction which apparently brought her national fame. In 1530, when she heard that the disgraced Cardinal Wolsey was intending to make his very first visit to York, of which he had been made archbishop by proxy in 1514, she declared that though he might see the city he would never reach it. According to the pamphlet Wolsey went to the top of the tower of Cawood Castle, saw York some 8 miles distant, and vowed that when he reached the city he would have Mother Shipton burnt as a witch. He also sent three of his high-placed friends to her house to interrogate her. It is a matter of record that Wolsey, on 4 November 1530, three days before his planned lavish enthronement in York Minster, was arrested at Cawood on a charge of high treason. He became ill on the journey to London and died in Leicester Abbey. 
This 1641 pamphlet also contains Mother Shipton's prophecies concerning York, including one which could be said to have anticipated the siege of York at the time of Marston Moor (1644). There are gory descriptions of forthcoming wars, one between England and Scotland, and the concluding lines of this short pamphlet refer to the master of a ship sailing up the Thames and finding that London has been devastated. This was taken to be a prediction of the fire of London, as we know from a reference in the diary of Samuel Pepys (20 October 1666), who stated that when Prince Rupert on board ship heard of the fire he simply said 'now Shipton's prophecy is out' (Pepys, 7.333). 
The 1641 pamphlet was reprinted in various forms, some with woodcuts showing Wolsey looking out from the tower, confronted by a hideous witch, some with commentaries on how the prophecies had been fulfilled, notably in William Lilly's 'Ancient and Modern Prophesies' (1645). The York provenance is confirmed by accurate local references in the 1641 pamphlet and by the description of Mother Shipton as the 'Sibylla Eboracensis' ('the Sibyl of York') in the early pamphlet 'Nuncius propheticus' (1642). Her birthplace, however, is later given as 'Naseborough' (Knaresborough), some 16 miles to the west of York, in a grossly fictitious and salacious version of her life by Richard Head, 'The Life and Death of Mother Shipton' (1667). 
Head claimed that she was born, a daughter of the Devil, in a house near the Dropping Well in 1486 or 1487. It is significant that John Leland, who, unlike Head, visited Knaresborough and its petrifying well (about 1538), made no mention of the prophetess. By this time she would have been well known for her prediction concerning Wolsey, and any Knaresborough connection would presumably have been noted by an antiquarian as close to Henry VIII as Leland. Head added to his account of Mother Shipton's phenomenal ugliness and supernatural powers (levitation, poltergeist effects) a number of fabricated prophecies -- all relating to events which had taken place by 1667 -- such as '
The Western Monarch's Wooden Horses 

Shall be destroyed by the Drake's forces, 

' purporting to forecast the Spanish Armada.An anonymous pamphlet based on Head's version, 'The Strange and Wonderful History of Mother Shipton' (1686), adds that she was baptized by 'the Abbot of Beverley' as 'Ursula Soothtell' (in later versions 'Southiel' or 'Sonthiel') and that at the age of twenty-four she married a carpenter named Toby Shipton of York. It also states that she died (presumably in York) at the age of seventy-three, having predicted -- as Nostradamus is said to have done -- the day and hour of her death. Alleged tombs of Mother Shipton, both in York and near Williton, Somerset, have no historical basis. 
Interest in Mother Shipton's prophecies was maintained over the next couple of hundred years by the steady appearance of reprints, sometimes in chapbooks of fortune telling. By the end of the eighteenth century she was well-known as a pipe-smoking puppet and a popular pantomime dame, with a song (set to the tune of 'Nancy Dawson') referring to her role in several Covent Garden productions, from about 1770 to 'Mother Shipton Triumphant, or, Harlequin's Museum' (1793). In these pantomimes she was a kind of ugly fairy godmother responsible for spectacular transformation scenes. Her face, with the classic hooked nose and upturned chin of a witch, was now sufficiently familiar for a British moth ('Euclidia mi', later renamed 'Callistege mi'), with a similar profile on its wings, to be officially named the Mother Shipton. 
A boost to flagging interest in Mother Shipton was provided in Victorian times by Charles Dickens, who printed a story by Dudley Costello in 'Household Words' (1856) linking her with the Rollright Stones, and especially by the Brighton bookseller Charles Hindley. In 1862 Hindley printed a set of bogus rhymed prophecies, claiming they had been found in a manuscript in the British Museum. (After they had been reprinted in 'Notes and Queries' he wrote to the editor in 1873 confessing he had written them all himself.) In these much-quoted fabrications Mother Shipton is supposed to have predicted railways, iron-hulled ships, wireless telegraphy, and so forth. The last lines of Hindley's doggerel aroused much interest and alarm: '
The world then to an end shall come 

In Eighteen Hundred and Eighty One. 

' In a version of the prophecies printed in Knaresborough in 1910 this date was changed to 1991, and there are still local claims that Mother Shipton predicted that the world will end when Knaresborough's High Bridge collapses for a third time. This story can be traced back to the actual collapse of the railway viaduct over the River Nidd in 1848, after which it was alleged that the prophetess had always said it would fall down twice and stand for ever when built a third time. 
Although traditions or sayings concerning Mother Shipton have appeared in Somerset, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, Oxfordshire, London, and elsewhere, she is now especially associated with Knaresborough, where much of the legend and fabrication has for years been presented as fact. Until about 1908 visitors to the town were being shown a house near Low Bridge where Mother Shipton was said to have been born. Now her birthplace is commercially promoted as a cave near the Dropping Well. 
Although almost everything written about Mother Shipton and attributed to her has been invented, she was in all probability a veridical woman living in York about 1530. Whether her prediction concerning Wolsey was shrewd guesswork or genuine clairvoyance, it was sufficient to assure her a unique place in English folklore as its best-known witch and prophetess -- a convenient peg on which to hang many a fanciful claim. 


@@@@@


doc= 25421


Shipton, John (1680-1748), surgeon, son of James Shipton ('b'. 1637?), an apothecary living in Hatton Garden, London, was apprenticed on 2 February 1696 for seven years to William Pleahill, paying $20. He served his time and was duly admitted to the freedom of the Company of Barber-Surgeons on 7 March 1703. He served the office of steward of anatomy in 1704, and on 1 June 1731 he was fined rather than serve as steward of the ladies' feast. He was elected an examiner in the company on 27 August 1734, and on 17 August 1738 he became a member of its court of assistants. He then paid a fine of $30 to avoid serving in the offices of warden and master, to which he would have been elected in due course. He lived for many years in Brooke Street, Holborn, London, where he enjoyed a lucrative practice. He was called into consultation by John Ranby when Caroline, the queen of George II, was mortally ill of a strangulated hernia. Shipton sided in this consultation with Ranby against Paul Buissiere, who was in favour of an immediate operation. Lord Hervey says of him that he was 'one of the most eminent and able of the whole profession' (Hervey, 507). He died on 17 September 1748. 


@@@@@


doc= 25422


Shipton, William (bap. 1640?, d. in or after 1672), poet, was probably the William Shipton, son of Thomas Shipton of Lythe, Yorkshire, baptized on 2 August 1640 at Whitby. A Richard Shipton, son of Thomas, had been baptized there three years before. William Shipton was admitted pensioner at Clare College, Cambridge, on 28 April 1657. He matriculated that year. On 6 April 1659 he migrated to Magdalene College, Cambridge, and graduated BA in 1660 and MA in 1664. 
In 1659 Shipton published a collection of poetry and prose under the title of 'Dia: a Poem'. The introductory portion extends to thirty pages, comprising a dedication 'to the Truly Noble Edward Trotter Esquire', and commendatory verses by 'Jo. Cooke, Gent., Aulae Clar.', and by Richard Shipton (possibly the poet's brother). Besides a series of poems in praise of his mistress Dia, the volume contains elegies on Thomas Shipton (who was drowned) and on Lord Sheffield; poems on gunpowder treason and on Robert Wilson (a noted musician); and a prose essay entitled 'Cupid made to see and love made lovely'. His poems are full of extravagant and complex metaphors, and his prose is even more fantastic. 
Shipton was ordained a priest on 27 May 1661, and was appointed vicar of Escrick, Yorkshire, in 1663 (retaining the appointment until 1672) and vicar of Lythe in 1664. One of his sermons was published in 1668 under the title 'The Mystery of Afflictions'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25423


Sherley, Anthony, Count Sherley in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1565-1636?), adventurer and diplomat in the Persian service, was born at the family estate of Wiston in Sussex, one of nine children of Sir Thomas Sherley (c.1542-1612) and Anne Kempe ('c'.1542-1623), daughter of Sir Thomas Kempe of Ollantighe, Kent, and brother to Sir Thomas Sherley and Sir Robert Shirley. Having matriculated from Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1579 and after graduating BA in 1581, in November 1582 he was elected a probationer fellow of All Souls College, a position he held until 1589. In 1583 he was admitted to the Inner Temple. 
Having acquired, as he was later to write, 'those learnings which were fit for a Gentlemans ornament, without directing them to an occupation' ('Sir Anthony Sherley His Relation', 1) Sherley left England in 1586 to serve as a captain of infantry under Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, in the wars in the Low Countries. He first saw action at Brielle, commanding an undisciplined garrison company. In 1588, after his brother Thomas's inept performance at Zwolle, he was assigned to the remnants of Thomas's cavalry company; however, upon taking charge it was clear that the force was woefully undermanned. The company was disbanded and Sherley was sent home. 
After the Spanish capture of the Breton ports in 1591 Sherley returned to the continent to command one of the earl of Essex's three regiments. Though the campaign itself proved indecisive, in June Sherley distinguished himself in battle near Chatelaudren when a sizeable Spanish force of some 500 horse and 6000 foot descended upon the English. Hard pressed, Sherley led the English cavalry against the attackers, personally killing a Spanish captain, and was credited with single-handedly turning the tide of the battle. The next day, with a force of only fifteen horse, Sherley repulsed a Spanish counter-attack, though his own horse was shot from under him; his courageous conduct during these actions earned him a reputation for bravery and noblesse which served him well for much of his life. 
Early in 1593 Sherley was dispatched on a mission to the French court where Henri IV awarded him the knighthood of the order of St Michel. Elizabeth I was furious that he had accepted a foreign honour without her permission and recalled him to England. He was questioned extensively by Lord Keeper Sir John Puckering and Lord Buckhurst about the details of the oath he had taken; when his answers were found inadequate he was tossed in the Fleet prison. When he was released shortly afterwards it was on condition that he resign the robes of the order. Though the title no longer had any official sanction he was commonly known as Sir Anthony. 
At some point in 1594 Sherley secretly married Frances ('bap'. 1573), daughter of Sir John Vernon of Hodnet, Shropshire, and first cousin to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. Although the union brought him closer to the earl, whom he was later to call the 'patterne of my civill life' and 'a worthy modell of all my actions' ('Sir Anthony Sherley His Relation', 2), it also incurred the queen's displeasure. As a result he was exiled from court and moved to Inglefield, in Tilehurst, Berkshire, a property sold to him by Essex. Unfortunately the union did not prove happy, and to escape his domestic situation he fitted out an expedition against the Portuguese settlement on the island of Sao Thome, in the Gulf of Guinea. Aided by his father Sherley equipped a fleet of eleven ships and an army of 1500 men at the cost of at least $15,000. However, in order to procure a commission legitimizing his attack he was forced to surrender four ships and 500 men to Essex for his raid on Cadiz. With a much reduced fleet Sherley set sail on 20 May 1596. 
Ill fortune dogged the venture from the start as contrary winds caused the sacking of Sao Thome to be abandoned and disease left Sherley despairing for his life. Instead the fleet sailed for Sao Tiago, in the Cape Verde Islands. Here they seized and held the town for two days against some 3000 Portuguese; however, there proved little worth taking and so they continued 10 miles down the coast to the fortified town of Ribeira Grande (now Cidade Velha). In the ensuing battle Sherley's force lost eighty men while inflicting 250 casualties on the Portuguese, but the English feared a counter-attack and so fled back to their ships, resolving to sail across the Atlantic. 
The crossing proved wretched and disease again took its toll. On 17 October the fleet put in at Dominica in the Leeward Islands for six weeks to let the crew recover. Early in February 1597, after one ship mutinied near the mouth of the River Magdalena in Colombia, the remains of the fleet landed in the Spanish territory of Jamaica. Set on plunder Sherley marched a sizeable force 6 miles inland to the capital, Santiago de la Veda (now Spanish Town), only to find it deserted and the pickings slim. Putting to sea once more all but one of his remaining ships mutinied off Havana and so Sherley was forced to curtail his voyage. He returned to Dover in July, alive but poor. 
Searching for some way to abate his family's ailing fortunes, in winter 1598 Sherley accepted Essex's invitation to conduct a small company of English volunteers to Ferrara to assist Don Cesare d'Este, the late duke's illegitimate son, in his claim to the duchy against Pope Clement VIII. With twenty-five English volunteers Sherley left England in spring 1598; but upon reaching Augsburg he received word that Don Cesare had capitulated. Even though the apparent pretence for the mission had evaporated Sherley continued to Venice, where he was joined by his brother Robert. According to his subsequent account, while in Venice Anthony wrote to Essex, who advised him to continue to Persia for the glory of God and to find parts fit for English navigation. Others were more cynical and charged that having wrung $400 from English merchants in Constantinople and a further $500 from those in Aleppo, billing the sums to Essex, he had gone to seek his fortune ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 130). Either way the enterprise lacked official sanction. According to a letter of April 1601 penned by the English Jesuit Robert Persons, Sherley became a Catholic during his stay in Venice. 
By all accounts Sherley's party was well received in Persia with Sherley granted the rank of 'mirza'. But after a stay of five months, Shah 'Abbas accepted Sherley's offer to return to Europe as his ambassador to the Christian potentates, charged with engineering an alliance between Persia and Christendom against the Turks; in exchange for Christian support Persia was to be opened up to Christian merchants. Despite the fact that such an alliance would be injurious to English mercantile interests in the region, its terms seem to betray Sherley's influence, for the shah also promised to force the Armenian church to submit to Rome. 
Leaving his brother Robert behind as a hostage, Anthony Sherley left Persia in May 1599, accompanied by Hasain Ali Beg Bayat and an Augustinian friar, Nicolo de Mello. Equipped with an array of gifts for the princes of Europe the party travelled north via the Caspian. But by the time they reached Moscow, Sherley and the friar were at odds: de Mello accused Sherley of stealing 1000 crowns and ninety diamonds from him, while Sherley accused the friar of sodomizing two of his attendants. To this end Sherley denounced de Mello to Tsar Boris Godunov, who had the friar stripped of his possessions and put in a monastery. But Sherley's haughty airs irritated the tsar, for when the party was summoned to an audience he refused to enter behind the Persians, arguing that it was the height of indignity for a Christian to walk behind pagans. 
Early in 1600 the party left for Archangel. There Sherley persuaded Hasain Ali Beg Bayat that, in the interests of safety, he should send forward one of the cases of presents given to them by the shah to Rome. Continuing to Prague the two ambassadors presented the idea of a Christian alliance with Persia to Emperor Rudolph II on 7 November 1600. Although the emperor was initially enthusiastic, when Sherley refused to return to Persia immediately and suggested instead that he should proceed to England, his credibility was compromised. As his stay lengthened and it became clear that he was living beyond his means, rumours begin to circulate that he was a Spanish spy. The truth was more mundane, for, by the time he left the court in February 1601, Sherley had contracted debts worth in excess of 46,000 thalers. 
In April 1601 the two ambassadors arrived at Rome but were now clearly at odds over the issue of precedence. They quarrelled violently over the matter of accommodation, with Sherley insisting on taking the better of the two apartments given them by the pope. Moreover, it was now clear to the Persian that the presents they had loaded for transport in Archangel had disappeared and he accused Sherley of stealing them; he alleged that Sherley had become so crushed by debt that now his only interest in proceeding with the embassy was to get money from foreign potentates. Indeed, relations between the ambassadors had deteriorated to such a point that they were granted separate audiences with the pope. The situation was further complicated because in their commission from the shah Sherley was not referred to as 'ambassador'. Sherley argued that the translation was poor but the pope clearly favoured Hasain Ali Beg Bayat and Sherley was dismissed on 2 June 1601. At this news the Venetian ambassador in Rome remarked that Sherley 'has done many out of much money, and loud are the lamentations' ('CSP Venice', '1592-1603', 462). At this point Sherley seems to have given up any hope of completing his embassy, for he stayed in Rome secretly, twice offering his services to Cardinal d'Ossat and once making overtures to the French king. He left his brother Robert to his fate in Persia. 
From late 1601 until the end of 1604 Sherley was resident in Venice, engaged as a spy for both the Spanish and the Scots, in which capacity he was watched continually by two English agents. In late March 1603 his activities began to concern the Venetian senate and he was arrested for 'insult to the Persian merchant's house' ('CSP Venice', '1603-7', 1). His position was further complicated because a ship owned by his brother Thomas had just plundered a Venetian galleon returning fully laden from Egypt. In May 1603 he was released from gaol on condition that he leave Venetian territory, but James I intervened, begging the senate to lift the decree. Free, Sherley began to spy again, but this time for the emperor, furnishing him with reports on Turkish strengths. To the Venetians this was intolerable, for it jeopardized their policy of avoiding antagonizing the Ottomans, a cornerstone of their diplomacy. On 1 December 1604 Sherley was summoned to appear before the council of ten and given four days to leave the demesne, never to return under pain of death ('CSP Venice', '1603-7', 194). 
On 2 June 1605 Sherley returned to Prague, where he was received by the emperor, who commissioned him to create a diversion against the Turks in north Africa. In October, Sherley landed in Safi, calling himself 'ambassador' and living, by all accounts, in the manner of a prince, lavishly entertaining any Christian merchant who came to his door. The money advanced to him by the emperor was quickly exhausted and he resorted to living on credit. In February 1606, with a grand escort of 500 men, he travelled to Marrakesh and the court of Abu Faris. Though he was received with great state, when he came to an entertainment organized by the king he refused to dismount from his horse, instead riding through the hall in a manner befitting royalty. When summoned to the same chamber five days later he found a chain across the entrance. But rather than heed the king's wishes, Sherley was indignant and rode away; the chain, he explained, represented a dishonour to the person he represented. 
Despite several meetings, Sherley was unable to persuade Abu Faris to strike against the Turks in Algiers and Tunis; in late June, he was dismissed. However, as was becoming something of a habit, he had incurred such debts that he was obliged to leave behind two of his company as hostages for a debt of 250,000 florins. He extricated himself from a further 60,000 florins of debt to some local Christian merchants by denouncing them to the king for defrauding the treasury of customs. 
When he was finally able to leave north Africa in autumn 1606 Sherley had with him two Portuguese prisoners he had ransomed, hoping to be well compensated for his expenses from their families; but when he reached Lisbon they refused to pay him. Temporarily without means, Sherley made for the Spanish court in Madrid in an attempt to persuade Philip III to finance a scheme to capture two Barbary ports. Instead he was given a formal commission to harass ships supplying the Turks in the Levant and the Low Countries and admitted to the order of San Iago. It was widely rumoured that he owed this new position to the influence of Anthony Creswell, a notorious English Jesuit implicated in the Gunpowder Plot. A brief visit to Prague in 1607 saw Sherley created count palatine by the emperor. 
Over the period between 1607 and 1610 Sherley came to treat his commission as a licence for piracy. When he seized a Venetian ship, selling its cargo in Palermo, the Venetians complained vigorously to the Spanish and Sherley was relieved of his position. Completely discredited he made his way back to Madrid where he met and quarrelled with his brother Robert, the new ambassador from the Persian shah, although Robert probably helped him publish his self-aggrandizing 'Relation of his Travels into Persia' in London in 1613. In this work, Sherley presents himself as endowed with a natural nobility; his difficulties, he suggests, are a consequence of the fact that such natural virtue is coming to be regarded as less important than a person's financial worth. While he was sympathetic to Persian customs and evaluated them according to their purpose and effect, he had nothing but bile for the Turks. 
Now faced with the direst poverty Sherley was granted an allowance of 3000 ducats a year by the Spanish king out of pity; the greater part of this was spent in paying his creditors. His poverty was such that in December 1619 the English ambassador at Madrid reported that Sir Anthony was on the brink of starvation but was 'as full of vanity as ever he was, making himself believe that he shall one day be a great prince, when for the present he wants shoes to wear' (Penrose, 155). 
Through the remainder of his life Sherley tried to ingratiate himself with the Jesuits, and sank to concocting plots against his enemies, all of which came to naught. In March 1618 rumours reached the English court that Sherley intended to flee his creditors and live out his days in the Canaries; but again nothing came of this scheme ('CSP col.', 3.188). Anthony Sherley died in obscurity, probably in 1636. 
In 1607 John Day, William Rowley, and John Wilkins wrote a play entitled 'The Travailes of the Three English Brothers'. With a striking affinity to the short tract written by Anthony Nixon, 'The Three English Brothers', published at almost the same time, their play presents a heavily sensationalized version of Sherley's dealings with the shah and the subsequent embassy to Europe. Sherley typifies the honour and nobility of Christendom against the machinations of the shah's counsellors at the Persian court and of the scheming Halibeck with whom he must discharge his mission to the princes of Europe. In 1888 Scott Surtees advanced the rather dubious argument that Sherley wrote all Shakespeare's plays. 


@@@@@


doc= 25424


Shirley, Evelyn Philip (1812-1882), antiquary and genealogist, was born in South Audley Street, London, on 22 January 1812, the eldest son of Evelyn John Shirley (1788-1856) of Ettington Park, Warwickshire (the Shirleys were a branch of the family of the earls Ferrers). His mother was Eliza (died 1859), only daughter of Arthur Stanhope. He was educated at a preparatory school at Twyford, near Winchester, and afterwards by a private tutor. In 1826 he went to Eton College. He matriculated as a gentleman commoner from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 15 October 1830, graduated BA in 1834, and proceeded MA in 1837. 
Shirley owned property at Lough Fea in co. Monaghan, Ettington in Warwickshire, and Houndshill on the borders of Worcestershire. After he succeeded his father, he made considerable alterations to Ettington Park. Here, and at Lough Fea, he built up a large library and picture collection. Benjamin Disraeli portrayed Shirley in 'Lothair' as Mr Ardenne, 'a man of ancient pedigree himself, who knew everybody else's'. 
Shirley was a Conservative, who opposed the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland, and believed in the union of secular and religious education. However, he, unlike his father, was tolerant towards the Catholic priesthood on his co. Monaghan estate. He was MP for co. Monaghan from 1841 to 1847, and from 1853 to 1865 he represented Warwickshire South. In 1837 Shirley was high sheriff for co. Monaghan, and in 1867 he became high sheriff for Warwickshire. 
Shirley's first interest, however, was genealogy and local history, and he rarely took part in parliamentary debates. He wrote a number of books and articles on the history of the Shirley family and their estates, both in England and Ireland. He also wrote on the Church of Ireland and on genealogy. He was a frequent contributor to 'Notes and Queries'. Shirley was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and a corresponding member of the New England Historic Genealogical Society. In 1881 he was awarded an honorary LLD at Dublin. He was also a trustee of Rugby School and of the National Portrait Gallery. 
On 4 August 1842 Shirley married Mary Clara Elizabeth (1823-1894), eldest daughter of Sir Edmund Hungerford Lechmere. She greatly encouraged the school of Irish lace that was established at Carrickmacross, near Lough Fea. They had three daughters and a son, Sewallis Evelyn Shirley, who founded the Kennel Club. Shirley died at Ettington Park on 19 September 1882, and was buried there in the family vault on 26 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 25425


Shirley, Henry (1591x7-1627), playwright, was the second son of Sir Thomas Shirley the younger ('c'.1564-1633) of Wiston, Sussex, traveller and member of parliament, and his first wife, Frances, daughter of Henry Vavasour of Coppenthorp, Yorkshire. His exact date of birth is unknown, but he must have been born between his parents' secret marriage in late 1591 and the baptism of his younger brother, Thomas, on 30 June 1597. His childhood was no doubt somewhat unsettled, for his father ran up many debts travelling to Portugal and Turkey and was imprisoned several times. 
Shirley's one surviving play, 'The Martyred Soldier', is a Christian martyr play set among the medieval Vandals and Goths. It concerns the noble warrior Bellizarius and his wife, Victorina, converts to Christianity who endure much hardship for their beliefs. They are comforted by angels who sing a number of songs, one of which is preserved in a contemporary setting in a manuscript in the Bodleian Library (MS Don. c.57, fol. 24). Eventually the pair are martyred, but their daughter Bellina marries and converts Hubert, who becomes the first Christian king of the Vandals and Goths. The play was licensed in 1622-3 for Lady Elizabeth's Men at the Cockpit and then for Palsgrave's Men at the Fortune, but it was not entered in the Stationers' register until 15 February 1638 and was published that year, with a title-page declaring that it had been 'acted at the Private house in Drury lane, and at other publicke Theaters. By the Queenes Majesties servants'. The dedication to Sir Kenelm Digby was signed by John Kirke, an actor-playwright long associated with the Red Bull theatre. 
Shirley's only other surviving work is a set of verses in another manuscript in the Bodleian Library (MS Ashmole 38, fol. 75), entitled 'The Battaile the Combattantes, Sr Ambrose Vaux Knight; and Glascott the Bayley of Southwarke'. John Davies of Hereford's 'Scourge of Folly' (1611) has a poem addressed to 'Henry Sherley, Esquire', but this is probably too early to be the dramatist. Four plays were attributed to Shirley in a Stationers' register entry of 1653 but are now lost. These include 'The Duke of Guise' and 'Giraldo, the Constant Lover', about which nothing more is known; 'The Dumb Bawd of Venice', which was performed by the King's Men at court in 1628; and 'The Spanish Duke of Lerma', which was owned by the King's Men in 1641 and adapted by Sir Robert Howard in 1668 as 'The Great Favourite, or, The Duke of Lerma'. 
In 1622 Shirley's grandmother Lady Anne Shirley left him $40 per annum in her will, to be paid out annually by Sir Thomas Bishop. However, Shirley ran up debts and was chronically short of money. In October 1627 he went to the lodging of Sir Edward Bishop (Sir Thomas's son) in Chancery Lane, London, to demand his annuity, whereupon Sir Edward slew the unarmed Shirley with a sword. Bishop was originally sentenced to be burnt on the hand, but was pardoned on 21 October. The incident was gleefully recounted four years later by William Prynne in 'Histriomastix', and in two newsbooks of 1645. Shirley apparently never married, and died without children. 


@@@@@


doc= 25426


Shirley, Sir Horatio (1805-1879), army officer, born at 13 Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London, on 8 December 1805, was the fifth son of Evelyn Shirley (1756-1810), of Eatington (Ettington) Park, Warwickshire, and his wife, Phyllis Byam (died 1836), the only daughter of Charlton Wollaston of Horton, Dorset. His father's eldest brother, Evelyn John Shirley, was the father of Evelyn Philip Shirley (1812-1882). Following his education at Rugby School (from May 1820 to 1823) and Trinity College, Oxford (where he matriculated on 10 May 1823), Shirley became second lieutenant in the British army (by purchase) in May 1825, lieutenant (by purchase) in October 1826, captain (by purchase) in July 1833, major (by purchase) in December 1841, lieutenant-colonel in January 1848, and colonel of the 88th foot (Connaught Rangers) in 1854. He served with distinction in the Crimean War, taking part in the battles of Alma and Inkerman with his regiment. At the siege of Sevastopol he was general officer of the trenches in the attacks on the quarries on 7 and 18 June, and was commended by Lord Raglan for his 'arduous services'. In the storming of Sevastopol on 8 September he was wounded and invalided home. He was appointed CB on 5 July 1856 and KCB on 2 June 1869 and promoted major-general on 24 October 1862, lieutenant-general in 1871, and general on 1 October 1877. He was colonel of the 61st foot from February 1870 to September 1874 and of the 88th foot from September 1874 until his death. He died, unmarried, on 7 April 1879, at his house at Puddletown, near Dorchester, Dorset. 


@@@@@


doc= 25427


Shirley, James (bap. 1596, d. 1666), playwright and poet, was baptized on 7 September 1596 at St Mary Woolchurch, London, the oldest of five children of James Shirley (1569-1617) and his wife, Catherine. His father and grandfather and their children appear in the same parish records, but there remains little verifiable information about the family; it is likely that they had a small shop. Shirley was enrolled in the Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 4 October 1608. There he gave an average performance until he left, almost certainly on 11 June 1612, though the record is missing. Probably from then until 1614 he worked for the scrivener William Frith. 
According to his early biographer, Anthony Wood, Shirley next entered St John's College, Oxford, then presided over by the future archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud. Wood retails the anecdote that Dr Laud: 'had a very great affection for him, especially for the pregnant parts that were visible in him, but then having a broad or large mole upon his left cheek, which some esteemed a deformity, that worthy Doctor would often tell him that he was an unfit Person to take the sacred function upon him. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.260)' But Wood's story has never been substantiated. There is a record of Shirley's matriculation at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in Easter term 1615 and of his BA on 4 April 1617. Soon afterwards, on 4 January 1618, his first known poem 'Ecco and Narcissus the 2 Unfortunate Lovers' was entered in the Stationers' register. No copy of this remains, although editors agree that it is probably the poem about Narcissus in the 1646 edition of Shirley's poems. 
On 2 November 1618 Shirley was guaranteed to succeed as master of the grammar school at St Albans. The following year, on 19 September, he was ordained and, according to Wood, soon afterwards 'became a Minister of God's word in, or near to S. 'Albans'' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.260). There is no record as to when Shirley assumed and left the post at the school, but he held it by January 1621 and he was succeeded in January 1625. Meanwhile on 1 June 1618 he had married Elizabeth Gilmet (died 'c'.1645) of St Albans. Since her father, Richard, served as mayor, and since the mayor -- along with the governor of the school, the mayor's brother Robert -- controlled the appointment of master of the grammar school, it may be assumed that Shirley was promoted by prominent in-laws. One Shirley daughter was baptized at St Albans on 27 December 1619 and another was born and buried there in 1622. 
Wood also claims that about the time Shirley became a schoolmaster he 'changed his Religion for that of 'Rome'' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.260). Ever since, most scholars of Shirley except Bas have assumed that Shirley became a Roman Catholic, yet all have confessed that there is little substantive evidence to support this assumption. He could not have converted as early as Wood claimed, since he subscribed to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' in 1617, was ordained an Anglican priest in 1619, and signed a writ of excommunication as priest on 10 November 1623. Moreover, his children were baptized Anglican in the early 1630s, as was his last son in 1641. Finally, on 18 August 1662, four years before his death, he signed assent to the 'Bill of Uniformity', which required an oath subscribing to the 'Book of Common Prayer' from all who preached or taught. It is true that Shirley sought and received patronage in the circle of the queen, Henrietta Maria, a Roman Catholic; but he sought and gained patronage elsewhere as well. Probably he looked for patronage where it was available, among aristocrats estimated for their means, not their faith. Relatively few of his acquaintances were known Catholics, and the rare references in his works to Catholicism are ambiguous, so critics insistent on his Catholicism are reduced to supposition and innuendo. 
Wood writes that when Shirley found teaching 'uneasie to him, he retired to the 'Metropolis', lived in 'Greys' inn, and set up for a play-maker' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.261). The birth of his first son, Mathias, was recorded at St Giles Cripplegate on 26 February 1625 and by 1627 the family had moved to Holborn near Gray's Inn, one of the four inns of court, the personal and professional quarters for the legal establishment and their literary coteries. The parish register for St Andrew's, Holborn, records the births of two more sons, Thomas and James, and one more daughter, Mary, between 1628 and 1633, along with their baptisms and the deaths of Thomas and Mary. 
About the time Shirley moved to St Giles, at the age of twenty-eight, his career as a 'professional playwright' began. 'Professional playwright' designates both one who earned his primary livelihood writing plays for stage companies to produce for paying audiences and one whose craft was perfected through intensive study and extensive use of dramatic techniques proven popular by William Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, John Fletcher, and other forebears. In the Caroline era Shirley and his contemporaries Philip Massinger, John Ford, and Richard Brome were thereby distinguished from courtier playwrights against whom they waged poetic arguments. These gentlemen amateurs generally produced only a play or two during their active years rather than the professional average of two plays per year and relied on the expensive spectacle of elaborate stage machinery and props, rich costumes, intricate music, formal dance, and highly wrought language. Shirley and his peer 'professionals' relied more on the craft of traditional dramatic situations, characters, plotting, and language. The professionals occasionally borrowed from each other and honoured each other. Shirley provided commendatory poems for plays by each of the others and received poetic compliments from Massinger and Ford. 
Shirley and his professional colleagues wrote for private playhouses. These indoor theatres, which cost about six times more for admission than public theatres, catered to a privileged, typically well-born or wealthy or educated clientele. This audience was generally sophisticated and knowledgeable in its dramatic tastes and it sustained the three playing companies for which Shirley was successively the principal playwright. His dramatic career is thus conveniently divided into the three periods when he wrote for the impresario Christopher Beeston and the company that became Queen Henrietta Maria's Men at the Phoenix or Cockpit in Drury Lane (1625-36), for John Ogilby in Dublin mainly at the St Werburgh Street Theatre, producing plays for the court of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford and lord deputy of Ireland (1636-40), and finally back in London again for the King's Men at Blackfriars (1640-42). 
On 11 February 1625 Sir Henry Herbert, the master of the revels, licensed Shirley's first known play, 'Love's Tricks, or, The School of Compliment', to be played at the Cockpit under the management of Christopher Beeston. Both titles characterize a play in which a brother and two sisters either make plans for marriage unacceptable to their father or their lover's father, or reject plans imposed on them. A series of pursuits, feints, and confusions of individuals and genders and social stations follows until all ends happily among shepherds in the woods. The play sets a characteristic beginning for Shirley's complicated romance plots, which depend on young lovers managing to come together despite blocking fathers and competing wooers, mistaken identities, manipulations, and confusions among stock characters. The subtitle takes its name from a scene in the middle, a genial satire on characters presuming to climb the social ladder by imitating the manners and language that mark their betters. As 'Love's Tricks' this first play led to others such as 'The Wedding' (1626?, published 1629), 'The Witty Fair One' (1628, published 1633), 'The Changes, or, Love in a Maze' (1632, published 1632), 'Hyde Park' (1632, published 1637), 'The Bird in a Cage' (1633, published 1633), and 'The Opportunity' (1634, published 1640), all plays that emphasize romantic comedy and display wit. As 'The School of Compliment' Shirley's first play introduced 'The Humorous Courtier' (1631, published 1640), and 'The Lady of Pleasure' (1635, published 1637), plays that focus on mild satire of manners and witlessness. 
Shirley's second play licensed for performance was 'The Maid's Revenge' (9 February 1626) which on publication years later (in 1639) he claimed to be his second tragedy. After this play, which begins like a comedy then abruptly turns deadly, his next tragedy, 'Love's Cruelty' (1631, published 1640), is also atypical. Whereas his other tragedies are based more in machiavellian court intrigues over power, 'Love's Cruelty' centres on adulterous and fatal sexual compulsions. 'The Traitor' (1635, published 1635) is more representative. 

'The Grateful Servant' (1629, published 1630) was Shirley's first tragicomedy, a popular kind of play featuring a mixed tone that complicates a tragic situation rising from significant personal and social issues until it achieves a resolution dependent on miracles and charitable forgiveness. This was followed by 'The Young Admiral' (1633, published 1637), 'The Coronation' (1635, published 1640), and 'The Duke's Mistress' (1636, published 1638). All of the plays in this first period were produced by Christopher Beeston companies except for 'The Changes', which was produced at the Salisbury Court Theatre, the third of the prestigious private indoor theatres after the King's Men's Blackfriars and Beeston's Cockpit. 

'Hyde Park', first performed in 1632, featured three polite competitions for women in the setting of a foot race, a horse race, and other gaming activities at the annual spring opening of the fashionable London resort. It is an outstanding representative of Shirley's comedies. The characters are subjected to a series of love tests. One lady demonstrates her enduring fidelity to her long-lost husband. Another resists the seductive wiles of an aristocratic lover until this prodigal reforms. A third beats off the advances of unscrupulous adventurers to achieve union with her gentleman lover who has learned to admire his future wife's qualities in the course of their courtship. The most distinctive trait of 'Hyde Park' is the mannered language which tests all of the characters for their appropriate status. 
Stock characters generally populate Shirley's plays, and are exposed through their language. These include machiavels male and female, misled princes, greedy old men, blunt soldiers, lusty and foolish young suitors, witty gentlemen and even wittier ladies, clever servants, and gullible dupes and clowns. Model characters search for some sort of distinction in manners and language, personal styles that entertainingly adapt but do not violate acceptable social and dramatic roles; occasionally they pledge avowals to virtue. Villains search for inventions to enable them to defraud others; on discovery they confess in long repentances. Satiric characters demonstrate their lack of wit and their failure to advance socially. The traits of all these characters are revealed as much by the style of the language they speak as by their actions. Heroes and heroines are adept at speaking readily, cleverly, and figuratively, what the era called 'sprezzatura'. Villains use debased forms that prove self-undermining, fools use language that is trite, over elaborate, strained, obvious, and lacking in any decorum. All of these characters take time to admire their own successes and applaud or make fun of their fellows. 
Towards the end of the first phase, Shirley's dramatic career culminated in the wondrously productive season of 1633-4. His 'Young Admiral' received Sir Henry Herbert's warmest praise when it was licensed. 'Being free from oaths, prophaneness, or obsceanes', Herbert wrote, '[it] hath given mee much delight and satisfaction in the readinge, and may serve for a patterne to other poetts, not only for the bettring of maners and language, but for the improvement of the quality' ('Dramatic Records', 19). Herbert arranged for a performance for Charles's birthday and reported that the king and queen liked it. The play appeals through extended set speeches that speak of high ideals and the difficult choices facing the hero, appropriately named Vittori, his father, the lady he serves, and the princess of Sicily destined for the prince of Naples, Cesario. 
Like most tragicomedies, 'The Young Admiral' focuses on major concerns of aristocratic adolescents making crucial choices about love and marriage and about the honour of inherited martial status. But unlike tragedies, wherein extreme ambitions and commitments result in disaster, tragicomedies are governed by charitable forgiveness and miraculous conversion; they offer hope. Prince Cesario sets 'The Young Admiral' in motion through his excessive pride over Naples and his desire for a Neapolitan lady. He has insultingly rejected a Sicilian match, setting off a war. And, risking all, he has pressed his attentions on a lady promised to Admiral Vittori, a man whose naval skills are essential to the survival of Naples. He has wrongfully imprisoned Vittori's father for treason, and locked the gates of Naples against the victorious return of Vittori and the fleet. Through elaborate plot twists, various disguises and missions, and mistaken inferences, Vittori at different times is forced to choose between ideals of loyalty to country, loyalty to family, loyalty to honour, and loyalty to his lady; he faces the prospects of sacrificing his father, his lady, his country, and his own life. Repeatedly choosing self-sacrifice in fidelity to the crown even when wronged and banished, then agreeing in turn to surrender his family and his lady (whom he momentarily mistakes to be unfaithful), he exhibits the honour that makes him a man of true worth. His irascible father, his devoted lady, and the princess of Sicily who loves Cesario also prove their nobility. So does Cesario in a final reconversion. Similar concerns with honour are reflected in a comic tributary plot. 
Later that same season, 1633-4, Herbert reported that Charles thought Shirley's 'Gamester' to be 'the best play he had seen for seven years'. This was scarcely a surprise as the play had come from 'a plot of the king's' supplied to Shirley by Herbert himself ('Dramatic Records', 54-5). The play followed shortly after Shirley's production of 'The Bird in a Cage'. On the title-page of that play (published 1633), Shirley is described as 'Servant to Her Majesty'. In it he offered a sarcastic dedication to William Prynne, a counter-attack on Prynne's polemic against the theatre and, perhaps inadvertently, the court, that had cost him his ears. 
In January 1634 Shirley was admitted to membership of Gray's Inn as 'one of the Valets of the Chamber of Queen Henrietta Maria' (Shirley, 'Poems', xv). He was commissioned by the inns of court to write the most expensive and elaborate masque of the time as a reconciliatory offering to the king, a presentation on 3 February 1634, that so pleased the royal couple that the king commanded a rare second performance a few days later. 'The Triumph of Peace', staged by Inigo Jones with music by leading composers William Lawes and Simon Ives, proved to be an enormous success in demonstrating the legal establishment's affection and loyalty to the king, despite the attack of Prynne, a barrister. The king was gratified by the action that depicted him bringing together peace and law in a spirit of justice, and pleased at the support of his reforms expressed in the antimasque scenes. Shirley himself, to judge by his description in the preface to the first edition, was pleased with the rank, quality, and sumptuous attire of his audience. 
As Shirley's allegiance to royalism is affirmed in his masque, so his adherence to the established social hierarchy is affirmed in his moral interludes -- didactic plays which presented social ethics in allegorical form. The short, early interlude 'Contention for Honour and Riches' (published in 1633, and later expanded into 'Honoria and Mammon', published in 1659) focuses on relationships between the professions and the estates. The interlude features a scholar, a military officer, a courtier, a lawyer, a citizen merchant, and a bumptious country gentleman, all seeking to marry two desirable ladies, Lady Honoria and Lady Mammon. The scholar Alworth gains honour, and Colonel Conquest wins riches. The citizen and countryman show the deferential cowardice supposedly appropriate to their status, and in the interests of the commonwealth those of lesser station accede to the political visionary and state guardian. Meanwhile, the courtier shows promise in diplomacy and the lawyer reforms to promote justice rather than gain. Phantasms of a sick body politic are also portrayed and then dismissed to make way for the prophecy of a sound one. 
A period of severe plague that closed the theatres for seventeen months beginning on 12 May 1636 marks Shirley's second period. At the age of forty he moved with John Ogilby, who became master of the revels in Ireland, in the train of the lord deputy. During his four years in Dublin, Shirley not only wrote as many as eight new plays, but also wrote prefaces to the plays of John Fletcher, Ben Jonson, Thomas Middleton, and others, revised a number of plays for new productions by the St Werburgh Street Theatre, and published sixteen of his earlier plays, or revisions of them, in London. His new plays were mainly comedies, 'The Constant Maid' (published 1640), 'The Royal Master' (1638, published 1638), and tragicomedies, 'The Doubtful Heir' ('Rosania, or, Love's Victory', 1638?, published 1652), and 'The Gentleman of Venice' (1639, published 1655). They include, however, one tragedy, 'The Politician' (1639?, published 1655), and the pageant of the early life and miracles of the island's patron saint, 'St Patrick for Ireland' (published 1640). 
The final three years of Shirley's active playwriting career begin with his return to London in April 1640, to the King's Men and Blackfriars after the death of their principal playwright, Philip Massinger. Shirley had staged one tragicomedy, 'The Imposture' (1640), and one tragedy, 'The Cardinal' (1641, published 1652), when his last play, the comic 'The Sisters' (1642, published 1652), appeared on stage before the civil war closed the theatres in 1642. One new tragicomedy, 'The Court Secret', was printed in 1653 but not played until the Restoration. 

'The Cardinal' is an example of a late revenge tragedy employing a host of elements that characterize a genre popular since Kyd's 'The Spanish Tragedy' in the 1580s. According to his dedication and preface, Shirley considered it among the best of his plays. Like 'The Young Admiral', 'The Cardinal' focuses on honour and love, but now these are complicated by the passions of revenge. Since the play is founded in a series of vendettas, hell intervenes as well as heaven. Hell comes dressed as heaven in the Cardinal, head of a noble house, favourite of the King of Navarre, and a master machiavel. After the death of the duchess Rosaura's betrothed before consummation of the marriage, the Cardinal persuades the king to arrange her marriage to his nephew, the war hero Columbo, instead of her beloved Count d'Alvarez. When she persuades Columbo, away besieging a city, to release her from the contract, and then weds Alvarez, Columbo returns and -- disguised as a player in a wedding masque -- assassinates Alvarez. Then the Cardinal protects his nephew while Rosaura seeks revenge. Disguising her intention in cunning madness, she secretly allies herself with Hernando, an insulted colonel, who challenges and kills Columbo in a duel then seeks out the Cardinal, who has been made the protector of the duchess. In the final scene, the Cardinal tries to rape Rosaura, Hernando kills the Cardinal and then himself, and Rosaura is fatally poisoned in a trick devised by the Cardinal. 
Shirley employed the tried techniques of revenge tragedy such as a masque murder, a deadly duel, poisoning, multiple intrigues and deceptions, spying, employment of a future lover to avenge a dead one, feigned madness, and multiple killings. He also created a pattern of imagery to complement his themes of arrogant evil and wilful pride among the high born. Both villains and victims are throughout marked by the fire and lightning, storm and fury of their wilful desires, demands, and hatreds. They seek and expect the honour due their station and their political, martial, and amatory skills. Above justice, they relentlessly pursue status and vengeance. The characters' obsession with rank, honour, and revenge is projected in images of purple and red -- from the Cardinal's robes to the countess's flushed cheeks. The imagery of violence suffuses this powerful and carefully wrought play. 
In disillusioned retrospect Shirley believed that the depletion of elite, knowledgeable playgoers was as responsible as the civil war for closing the theatres. In 1640 in his prologue to the production by the King's Men in the Globe, a public theatre, of 'Rosania', written for the Dublin private theatre, he expressed consternation. To open ''A Prologue at the' Globe 'to his Comedy call'd' 'The Doubtfull Heire', 'which should have been presented at the' Black-Friers', he asserts that '
Our Author did not calculate his Play, 

For this Meridian; The Bank-side he knowes 

Is far more skilful at the ebbes and flowes 

Of Water then of Wit 

' and he admonishes hearers to behave 'As you were now in the 'Black-Friers' pit' (Shirley, 'Poems', 32). In Ireland in a prologue to 'The Toy' he had lamented that plays 'Ligitimate in Art' were received as stillborn while silly spectacles won applause, even from audiences in private theatres (ibid., 30). By the prologue to 'The Sisters', the last of his plays staged before the closing of the theatres, he was deploring the fact that the King's Men could not draw a crowd for their repertory of Shakespeare, Jonson, and Fletcher, the great names of the English theatre. Thirteen years later, in his dedication (1655) of 'The Politician' to the honourable Walter Moyle, esquire, he blamed the despised crowds who demanded worthless entertainment for the ban on plays. 
From the late 1630s Shirley needed more patronage than before in order to survive, although he was somewhat diffident in applying for it. Some literary historians applaud the apparent indifference to patronage that Shirley expressed in his dedication of 'The Maid's Revenge' to Henry Osborne in 1639: 'I never affected the ways of flattery; some say I have lost my preferment, by not practising that Court sin.' They take as evidence of lost preferment the royal appointment of Sir William Davenant as virtual laureate instead of Shirley, Herbert's censorship of the representations of polite society in the production of 'The Ball', Shirley's amiably satiric observations in 'The Humorous Courtier', 'The Lady of Pleasure', and other works during the early 1630s, and Shirley's move to Ireland. But the record shows that Shirley assiduously sought both ideological and financial support. He had strong social aspirations: the engraving of his bust in the 1659 edition of his 'Contention of Ajax and Ulysses' exhibits prominently a coat of arms. The Anglican divine Abraham Wright recorded that 'I beeleeve ['The Grateful Servant' was] purposely so studied by him for to take the court' (Kirsch, 257). He assiduously sought the favour of the nobility in his dedications. 'The Grateful Servant' was dedicated in 1630 to the earl of Rutland, the great-grandson of Sir Philip Sidney. In 1637 Shirley dedicated the publication of 'The Young Admiral' to the learned and wealthy George, Lord Berkeley, and the same year he dedicated 'Hyde Park' to Henry Hyde, earl of Holland, knight of the Garter, and member of Charles's privy council. In Ireland he dedicated 'The Royal Master' to the earl of Kildare, the esteemed Irish lord; then he provided for the play a new year epilogue that praised Charles and Charles's lord deputy of Ireland, the earl of Strafford. To Strafford's son Shirley later dedicated 'The Court Secret'. Other plays he dedicated to worthies who remain only tentatively identifiable by initials and status such as esquire, knight, or baronet. In 1635 Shirley made his most worthwhile dedication, of 'The Traitor', to William Cavendish, earl of Newcastle. This patron of Jonson, Ford, and Brome was to become Shirley's primary patron. 
In various prefaces, most notably in his introduction to the 1647 Beaumont and Fletcher folio, Shirley commends the power of the poet to present pleasurable and profitable models of ideal courtly conduct for young gentlemen and ladies. Often in the plays he promotes the values of the elite, but at the same time he suggests through curative satire the need to correct the failures and abuses of status. That is, he presents both an imitable golden mirror and a critical steel glass. From his first monarch in 'The Grateful Servant' to his last in 'The Court Secret' he reaffirms a divine right of kings because loyalty to royalty and nobility appears to be the only alternative to chaos. Shirley's weak or vacillating tragicomic monarchs or tragic misled ones are typically rehabilitated and their vain or machiavellian magistrates blamed. 
Repeatedly Shirley presented the related theme of the irrepressible nature of noble blood. In 'The Coronation', for example, amid political confusion caused by a machiavellian regent attempting to usurp power, royal scions unaware of their origins demonstrate their true nature by trying to rebel and to take over government, until they are recognized as rightful rulers. Similarly in 'The Gentleman of Venice', the son of a wet-nurse exchanged at birth for the true prince shows his base nature despite regal nurture, while the prince shows his regal nature despite nurture as a groundskeeper. Such exchanges and proofs hold true as well for women. In 'The Sisters' the real daughter Angellina proves noble and wins a prince while her changeling 'sister' demonstrates common vanity and social climbing until she is married off to a bandit. 
Shirley aims his satire at social and economic climbers. Plays such as 'The Opportunity', 'The Humorous Courtier', and 'The Ball' repeatedly demonstrate that while pretenders can ape the manners of their betters, finally their origins and shameful self-seeking will be revealed. The ambitions of all the machiavellian villains of the tragedies, however harmful to others, always destroy their own pretensions to status and honour. 
After the closing of the theatres, Shirley, in his mid-forties, joined his patron William Cavendish, earl of Newcastle, 'to take his fortune with him in the wars, for that Count had engaged him so much by his generous liberality towards him, that he thought he could not do a worthier act than to serve him, and so consequently his Prince. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.261)' Later Shirley paid a sequestration fine for his military service in the royalist cause from 1642 to 1644. It seems likely that he helped Cavendish write his play 'Captain Underwood' during this period. 'After the Kings cause declined', writes Wood, Shirley 'retired obscurely to 'London', where, among other of his noted friends, he found 'Tho. Stanley', Esq' (ibid., 2.261). He seems to have returned to London and to his family about 1645. His feelings about absence from his wife may well be expressed in his poem 'To Odelia'. Shirley now became the poetic centre of a coterie promoted by Thomas Stanley, in which he was able to show his loyalty to the royalist cause during its eclipse. He contributed a poetic commendation to Stanley's 'Poems' of 1647, an epithalamion for Stanley's wedding in 1648, and a dedication to Stanley's publication of 'The Brothers' in 1652. 
In his poem 'On a Black Ribband' Shirley flaunted his fidelity to the royalist cause by speaking of his pride in wearing a black armband as a sign of sympathy with the king's troubles. This poem was published in the 1646 edition of his 'Poems', a volume that was fronted by an engraving of the poet by William Marshall, and included verses of cavalier gallantry, songs, prologues, and epilogues from plays, and a masque. Some scholars are inclined to infer from certain lyrics in the volume that Shirley's wife had recently died. In 1647 Shirley was chosen to address readers of the third great folio of English renaissance plays, that of Beaumont and Fletcher. In the troubled time before the execution of Charles I, this folio served to rally the royalists of England with a nostalgic recollection of the theatrical achievements of the Stuart age. 
Some time during the period of Stanley's patronage, Shirley resumed his long-interrupted career as a schoolmaster. One consequence of this move was his publication of two Latin grammars, the 'Via ad Latinam' (1649) and the 'Rudiments of Grammar' (1656), later expanded. About this time he composed and revised several masques and interludes appropriate for schoolboys. One of these masques was 'Cupid and Death', written originally for private performance some time between 1651 and 1653. This masque in a more elaborate form was presented as an entertainment for the Portuguese ambassador who had come to negotiate a treaty of amity with Cromwell's government. Accompanied by fine new music by Matthew Locke and Christopher Gibbons, enlivened by dances by Luke Channen, and fitted out with splendid scenery, 'Cupid and Death' was performed, probably at Whitehall, on 26 March 1653, an unexpected revival of the masque in Commonwealth England. The action, in which Cupid and Death lodge at the same inn for the night, and their arrows become exchanged, so that thereafter Cupid's targets die and Death's victims become rejuvenated, seems to have been a nostalgic allusion to the old Caroline court world disrupted by the ravages of civil war. The masque was revived for a public performance in 1659. 
In the mid-1650s, when he was about sixty years old, Shirley married a widow, Frances Blackburne. The retirement of the schoolteacher was not as complete as Wood averred, however, as Shirley actively published his plays as well as the grammars and masques. The publication of eight unpublished plays began with the important 'Six New Playes' of 1653 that includes a valuable 'Catalogue' that identifies Shirley's plays. After the Restoration Shirley saw a number of his plays reproduced in print and, more importantly, in the repertories of the re-established theatrical companies. 
Shirley's end was hastened, in the autumn of 1666, by the great fire of London. Wood records that Shirley and his wife 'were driven by the dismal conflagration that hapned in 'London' an. 1666, from their habitation near to 'Fleetstreet', into the Parish of 'St. Giles in the Fields' in 'Middlesex', where being in a manner overcome with affrightments, disconsolations, and other miseries occasion'd by that fire and their losses, they both died within the compass of a natural day: whereupon their bodies were buried in one grave in the yard belonging to the said church of S. 'Giles' on the 29 of 'Octob'. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.262)' In a will the previous July Shirley testified to considerably more wealth than could have been anticipated for a poet and schoolmaster, leaving belongings to his widow, three sons, two daughters and sons-in-law, one grandchild, and several friends. 
Shirley's career flowered in the Indian summer of the Caroline stage. During the civil war years and the Commonwealth he struggled to survive, lacking the theatre or suitable patronage, and ill at ease in a republican setting. 1660 brought only a partial restoration of his fortunes, but his works remain a highly expressive record of the fashionable world of late Caroline England. Although his reputation declined -- he was charged with dullness by Dryden in 'Mac Flecknoe' -- Shirley's plays continued to be plundered for the stage into the eighteenth century, and they have been republished and read ever since. The hybrid tragicomedy was predominant among new plays when Shirley was writing and its vogue continued throughout the century. Tragedies dominated tastes in the era before Shirley wrote and again in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. But it was his social and romantic comedies that were most appreciated in the Caroline era, the Restoration, and again in the last half of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 25428


Shirley, John (c.1366-1456), author, translator, and scribe, is recorded in the early years of the fifteenth century in the service of Richard Beauchamp (died 1439), who became earl of Warwick in 1401. In 1403 Shirley was in Warwick's retinue in the campaign against Owain Glyn Dwr; in 1414 he collected wages from the exchequer for Warwick's retinue in France (the first of a number of such missions) and is specified as the earl's secretary in 1420-21. Warwick returned to England between 1428 and 1430 as tutor to Henry VI, from whom Shirley, as one of two recipients noted as being with the earl, received a new year's gift in 1428. In June 1428 Shirley and other members of the Beauchamp family and household were admitted together to confraternity of St Albans Abbey. On later occasions, often in connection with members of the Beauchamp household, Shirley is described as esquire of London. In 1432-3 he was comptroller of petty customs in the port of London, and in 1436 he was recorded in the London subsidy as having an income of $10 from lands in Hertfordshire. When Warwick and his wife both died in 1439, Shirley was still in their service. Shirley is mentioned in various legal and property transactions, noted as tenant of a house near St Bartholomew's Hospital from about 1438 in a document of 1444. In his will, dated 1 November 1452, Shirley asked to be buried in the lady chapel at St Bartholomew's, near his mother and first wife, Elizabeth. His second wife, Margaret, survived him. The will names executors, including John Wakering, master of St Bartholomew's Hospital (1423-66), John Cok, priest and brother of St Bartholomew's, Richard Caudray, dean of St Martin's-le-Grand, and Edward Norys, citizen and scrivener of London. Shirley died on 21 October 1456 and was buried at St Bartholomew's Hospital. His epitaph was recorded by the Elizabethan antiquary John Stow, who later owned several manuscripts copied by or associated with Shirley. 
Between about 1438 and his death Shirley also rented four shops from St Bartholomew's Hospital in Doke Lane and on the basis of manuscripts copied for him, or in his hand or clearly associable with him, some have speculated that Shirley ran a scriptorium, lending library, or some other sort of book business based in these properties. Shirley certainly both translated works from French and Latin and appears to have collected and annotated copies of contemporary vernacular authors, such as Chaucer and Lydgate, providing versified tables of contents and other commentaries to certain compilations. He received at least one set of verses from Richard Sellyng to correct. The surviving manuscripts associated with Shirley can be categorized in three groups: those in Shirley's own hand; those that passed through his hands and were annotated by him; and those apparently derived from manuscripts probably owned or annotated by him. Manuscripts copied by Shirley or containing substantial items in his hand: Cambridge, Trinity College, MS R.3.20; BL, Add. MS 16165, and Harley MS 78, folios 80'r'-83'v'; London, Sion College, MS Arc. L.40.2/E.44; Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 59; San Marino, Huntington Library, MS EL 26.A.13. Manuscripts annotated by Shirley or containing his distinctive mark of ownership and motto, a crowned A with the words 'ma ioye' or other mottoes: Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 61; Cambridge, Gonville and Caius College, MS 669*/646; CUL, MS Ff.1.33; BL, Royal MS 20 B.xv; LUL, MS 1; New Haven, Yale University Library, Osborn MS a 29; Tokyo, priv. coll. ('Master of game'). Manuscripts apparently or possibly derived in part from exemplars written or annotated by Shirley: Cambridge, Trinity College, MSS R.3.19 and R.3.21; Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University, Houghton Library, MS Eng 530; BL, Add. MSS 5467 and 34360, Cotton MS Titus A.xxvi, Harley MSS 2251 and 7333. 


@@@@@


doc= 25429


John Shirley (fl. 1678-1682), author, who claimed to be a doctor of medicine, wrote two medical books, 'A Short Compendium of Chirurgery' (1678) and 'The Art of Rowling and Bolstring' (1682), providing advice on how to deal with wounds, ulcers, and fractures. 


@@@@@


doc= 25430


Shirley, John (bap. 1648, d. 1679), author, was baptized at St Botolph, Aldersgate, London, on 18 August 1648, one of the sons of John Shirley, bookseller, and his wife, Anne. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 17 March 1665, becoming a scholar in 1667. He graduated BA on 18 February 1668 and proceeded MA on 28 November 1671. His ability was soon recognized and, according to his brother Benjamin, he wrote a life of Sir Walter Ralegh as the preface to an edition of Ralegh's 'History of the World'. In 1673 he acted as 'terrae filius', a privileged orator of the university, and was made a fellow of his college. But within the probationary period he was expelled for immoral conduct and returned to London. He married the daughter of an innkeeper of Islington and made his living by writing and by correcting for the press. He died in Islington on 28 December 1679 and was buried there on 30 December. 
He was not the only John Shirley writing at that time. 
John Shirley ('fl'. 1685-1688), writer, was author of 'The Famous History of Palmerin of England' (1685), an adventure story with a hero fighting giants and wild bears while crossing Europe, and two lively popular works in praise of women, 'The Illustrious History of Women' (1686) and 'The Triumph of Wit' (1688), which had reached an eighth edition by 1724. His name occurs with the preface to 'A true account of the enterprise of the confederate princes against the Turks and Hungarian rebels' (1685). That work was published by William Thackery, Duck Lane, London, who also published many works by 


@@@@@


doc= 25431


John Shurley (fl. 1681-1702), writer, who sometimes used the name of J. S. Gent. His range of works included an account of the life of Guy, earl of Warwick (1681), the story of Reynard the fox in heroic verse (1681), 'Ecclesiastical History Epitomized' (1682), an account of the life of Jesus, and 'Visions of Don Francisco de Quevedo Vellegass' (1682). 'The Compleat Courtier, or, Cupid's Academy' (1683) provided a popular lively collection of love songs, poems, epistles, and dialogue, and his 'Young Man's Resolution of the Maiden's Request' (1695) followed a similar theme. His final work, an abridgement by J. S. Gent, was the 'History of the Renowned and Valiant Prince Amadi of Gaul' (1702). 


@@@@@


doc= 25432


Shirley, Laurence, fourth Earl Ferrers (1720-1760), murderer, was born on 18 August 1720, the eldest son of Laurence Shirley (1693-1743) and his wife, Anne (died 1782), fourth daughter of Sir Walter Clarges, first baronet. His father was the fourth son of Robert Shirley, first Earl Ferrers. Laurence matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1737, but did not take a degree. He succeeded to the peerage and estates on the death in 1745 of his uncle Henry, third Earl Ferrers, who had been confined as a lunatic. He was inactive in the Lords, but did enter a protest against the war in Flanders on 2 May 1746, and another against the bill for the abolition of heritable jurisdictions in Scotland on 21 May 1747. On 16 September 1752 he married Mary (1737/8?-1807), fifth daughter of Amos Meredith, of Henbury, Cheshire, and sister of Sir William Meredith, third baronet. The marriage was childless. He was an aggressive husband who imprisoned his wife in his house at Staunton Harold in Leicestershire until the king's bench with difficulty obtained her release. The London consistory court took the severe step of excommunicating him for contempt in 1757 after his wife had initiated a separation suit in that court. She separated from him on the grounds of his cruelty, by act of parliament, in 1758. Thereafter he lived at Staunton Harold with his mistress, 'Mrs' Margaret Clifford, whose father, Richard Clifford, farmed nearby at Breedon. Ferrers and his mistress had four daughters. 
Although often lucid and businesslike, Ferrers had phases during which he was distracted or ungovernably excited. In these fits his gesticulation, grimacing, and suspicion of secret plots were wild. He became so overwrought after quarrelling with Sir Thomas Stapleton in 1758 that his family considered taking out a commission of lunacy against him. In addition to his brutal temper, he was prone to other freaks of behaviour. Under the act of separation of 1758 Ferrers's estates were vested in trustees, and John Johnson, who had been in the service of the Shirleys for many years, was appointed receiver of the rents. Ferrers developed an obsessive resentment of his steward, and on 18 January 1760 shot him with a pistol in a locked room at Staunton Harold. Johnson languished for a day before dying. The crime was premeditated, and afterwards Ferrers, both sober and drunk, upbraided Johnson as a villain. On 19 January the earl was spotted crossing his bowling green, armed with a blunderbuss, dagger, and pistols, trying to escape the crowd of colliers that had come to detain him. He was apprehended, and after examination at the bar of the House of Lords (13 February) was committed as a prisoner in the Tower of London. 
Ferrers's trial by his peers began on 16 April in Westminster Hall. At his brothers' prompting, he tried to escape a capital sentence by arguing that he was periodically insane, and not responsible for his actions at the time of the murder. He called the Bethlem doctor John Monro as an expert witness, whose testimony raised important issues of criminal responsibility and lunacy. Horace Walpole, who attended the trial, described its 'pomp and awfulness' to George Montagu. 'In general he behaved rationally and coolly; though it was a strange contradiction to see a man trying by his own sense to prove himself out of his senses. It was more shocking to see his two brothers brought to prove the lunacy in their own blood, in order to save their brother's life. Both are almost as ill-looking men as the Earl. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.279)' Despite his efforts, on 17 April the Lords unanimously found Ferrers guilty of felony and murder. The next day the lord keeper, Robert Henley, first Baron Henley, acting as lord high steward, sentenced him to death. The grandeur and solemnity of the occasion were impressive despite the 'modish' nature of some spectators. According to Elizabeth Montagu, 'ladies crowded to the House of Lords to see a wretch brought loaded with crime and shame to the bar, to hear sentence of a cruel and ignominious death; which, considering only this world, cast shame back on his ancestors, and all his succeeding family' ('Letters', 4.261-2). During the trial and after his conviction he was regularly visited by his cousin Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon, the prominent Methodist, who concerned herself with his spiritual welfare, and prevented him from seeing his mistress before his execution. 
Ferrers was hanged on 5 May at Tyburn gallows. William Hickey attended the execution: 'His lordship was conveyed to Tyburn in his own landau, dressed in a superb suit of white and silver, being the clothes in which he was married, his reason for wearing which was that they had been his first step towards ruin, and should attend his exit. ('Memoirs of William Hickey', 1.20)' According to Walpole, 'this horrid lunatic... shamed heroes' in his final comportment. 'He was stopped at the gallows by the vast crowd, but got out of his coach as soon as he could, and was but seven minutes on the scaffold, which was hung with black... The mob was decent, admired him, and almost pitied him' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.283). The tradition that Ferrers was hanged by a silk cord instead of a hemp rope was denied by the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and is not mentioned by any of the eyewitness accounts, but has become part of the mythologized story of the execution. His remains were dissected by anatomists before burial under the belfry at St Pancras, but were reinterred at Staunton Harold on 3 June 1782. 
Ferrers was said to have left $4000 in East India Company bonds for the benefit of his mistress, Margaret Clifford, and their children, and to the family of his victim, Johnson. Johnson's family were also made the beneficiaries of $6000 raised from Ferrers's estate and held in trust for their use. Ferrers's wife married, on 28 March 1769, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Lord Frederick Campbell (1729-1816), and was killed in a fire, supposedly caused by an accident with a light while she was reading in bed, at Coombe Bank, Kent, on 26 July 1807. 
Ferrers's brother 
In 1763 Ferrers began to transform his seat at Staunton Harold, which in its location and surroundings is an exceptionally pure example of rural England. The Shirley family had lived there since the fifteenth century. He remodelled the north front, extended the east front, and added a south front. The exterior style of the house is Palladian, with widely spaced windows and Doric columns, but the interior has many neo-classical features. He retained the Gothic chapel, built during the Commonwealth, standing at an angle to the house on the south-east, adding to the air of calm and measured beauty. The overall effect is highly accomplished if, as seems likely, Ferrers was his own architect. At the time of his death these alterations were almost complete. The old formal gardens, with basins and canals, were also replaced by fashionable landscaping with two lakes. These improvements were partly financed by sales during the mid-1760s and in 1775 of ancestral properties in Northamptonshire and Derbyshire. 
Ferrers was evidently a virtuoso among admirals, for he was elected FRS in 1761 as recognition of his observations on the transit of Venus and for other mathematical investigations. He was grand master of the freemasons (1762-4). He died on 1 October 1778 at Chartley Manor Place, Staffordshire, the ancient home of the Ferrers family, and was buried on 11 October at Staunton Harold. His wife died at Hampton Court, Middlesex, on 26 March 1791. They had no children, and Ferrers was succeeded in the earldom and estates by his brother Robert (1723-1787). Another brother was the Methodist preacher Walter Shirley (1725-1786). 


@@@@@


doc= 25433


Shirley, Sir Robert, Count Shirley in the papal nobility (c.1581-1628), diplomat, was born at the family estate of Wiston in Sussex, the youngest son and one of nine children of Sir Thomas Sherley (c.1542-1612) and Anne (died 1623), daughter of Sir Thomas Kempe of Ollantighe, Kent. While details of his education are unclear, given the state of the family fortune by the early 1590s it is unlikely that it was as rigorous as that of his elder brothers, Sir Thomas Sherley (1564-1633/4) and Sir Anthony Sherley (1565-1636?). He certainly did not attend university, for in 1598 he was resident at the court of Ferdinand, grand duke of Tuscany, where he had been for five years. 
When Anthony Sherley's scheme to incite war over Ferrara collapsed in 1598, Robert Shirley travelled to Venice to join him. Seduced by stories of Persia's wealth, about May 1599 the brothers sought passage on an Italian merchantman bound for Aleppo. But, with poor weather impeding their progress and with tempers running high, an altercation broke out after Anthony had one of the Italian crew flogged for insulting the queen. The situation escalated when Shirley gave the ship's captain a 'sound boxe' (Parry, 5-6) after the latter tried to reassert his authority. Bloodshed was averted only when Italian merchants on board suggested that the English be left at Zante. The party finally reached Aleppo in September; from there they travelled overland to Qazvin in Persia, where they arrived in December. 
After a series of meetings with Shah 'Abbas I through the spring of 1600, Anthony was dispatched to negotiate an alliance with the princes of Europe against the Turks; Robert remained behind as a hostage. Initially he was treated well and seems to have helped the shah reorganize his army. Probably about 1603, while in the shah's service, he was converted to Catholicism by the Augustinian friar Antonio de Gouveia. By 1605 though, with no news from Anthony, the shah became markedly cooler towards his guest; in a letter to his brother dated 10 September 1606 Shirley lamented that he was esteemed little more than 'a common liar' ('CSP col.', 2, no. 353). In February 1608 he married Sampsonia ('c'.1590-1668), the daughter of a Christian Circassian chieftan, Isma'il Khan. She was baptized by the Carmelites and given the name Teresa. 
Having heard nothing from Anthony in seven years, 'Abbas selected Shirley to lead a second embassy to Europe. The Shirleys left Persia on 12 February 1608, and in the autumn reached Cracow, where they wintered at the court of Sigismund III. With Teresa housed in a Polish convent, Shirley continued on to Prague, where he was received by Emperor Rudolf II, who knighted him and made him a count palatine in June 1609. After a month in Florence, Shirley entered Rome on 27 September 1609, dressed in his characteristic Persian garb, a gold crucifix affixed to his turban. When he met Pope Paul V two days later he delivered a letter from the shah urging the pope to induce the princes of Christendom to unite and fight the Turks. For his efforts, the pope created Robert a count of the Lateran. 
From Rome, Shirley continued to Spain where he met Philip III in January 1610. However, the king regarded the shah's suggestion that the Spanish attack the Turks through Aleppo and Anatolia coolly. With commercial negotiations between the two realms proceeding slowly, in May Shirley sent to Poland for his wife. However, his standing as an emissary was undermined in February 1611 by the arrival of a new Persian ambassador, Dengil Beg Rumlu. Thus in the summer of 1611 Shirley and the pregnant Teresa left Spain, reaching England in August. On 1 October Shirley was received by James I at Hampton Court, where they discussed the shah's offer to give English merchants free use of two Persian ports and a monopoly over the Persian silk trade. While James himself was not uninterested in the idea of an alliance with Persia, given that the scheme was calculated by the shah to redirect the silk trade away from the Turks, it was opposed by the Levant Company. A month later, on 4 November 1611, Shirley announced the birth of his first and only child, a son, who was named Henry. 
Although negotiations dragged on into 1612, news of peace between the Turks and Persians rendered Shirley's mission moot. Thus in January 1613, leaving Henry at Wiston, he and his wife boarded 'The Expedition' to return to Persia, resolving to sail to Gwatar Bay in Baluchistan and then travel overland back to Esfahan. However, when they landed in August they overheard a plot to kill their party and to loot their baggage. They were forced to sail east down the coast to the mouth of the Indus, where they disembarked in late September 1613. Here they only narrowly escaped a conspiracy orchestrated by the Portuguese in collusion with the local viceroy to blow up their lodgings in Tatta. Determined to seek redress for his injuries from the Mughal emperor, in the spring of 1614 Shirley travelled to Ajmer. There he was well received by Jahangir and met Thomas Kerridge, factor of the East India Company in Surat, to whom he furnished a description of the Persian ports suitable for English ships along the Arabian Sea. At the end of September he joined a caravan bound for Persia and, about Christmas near Lahore, he met Thomas Coryate. The party finally reached Esfahan in March 1615. 
Shirley did not remain in Persia long, for in the summer 'Abbas asked him to return to Europe, this time to reassure the Spanish while the shah sought the support of a maritime power to help against the Portuguese at Hormoz. Reluctantly Shirley agreed to go. However, before he left he helped Richard Steel and John Crouther, the first representatives of the East India Company to reach Persia, to secure a series of trade concessions. After boarding a Portuguese ship in November, Shirley and his wife arrived in Goa in late February 1616 but had missed the annual convoy for Spain. Delayed in Goa for another year, it was not until September 1617 that they finally reached Spain, where they remained engaged in fruitless negotiations until 1622. 
Shirley and his wife left Spain in March 1622 and were in Rome by the end of July. Here, in full Persian dress, they both sat for paintings by Sir Anthony Van Dyck. Details of Shirley's activities over the next year are decidedly sketchy; however, he does seem to have had an audience with the emperor in Vienna in late 1622. 
Late in 1623 the Shirleys arrived in England and on 28 January 1624 Shirley was granted an audience with the king in which he proposed a scheme which would effectively secure for the English a monopoly over the Persian silk trade. While James liked the idea, the merchants of the East India and Levant companies seriously doubted the capacity of the European market to absorb the volume of silk the shah proposed to export and felt that such a scheme would damage irreparably their Indian and Turkish trade. 
Through the rest of 1624 and until James's death in March 1625 tensions between the king and the companies ran high over the scheme, the king going so far as proposing to venture personally into the Persian trade. While Charles I also expressed interest, Shirley's position was seriously compromised by the arrival, in February 1626, of a second emissary from the shah, Naqd Ali Beg. However, when the two ambassadors met in early March Naqd Ali Beg attacked Shirley, beating him severely. As a result, Charles resolved to send Sir Dodmore Cotton to Persia as an envoy; Shirley was to accompany him as a private citizen in order to clear his name. To this end the king demanded that the company transport Shirley's party to the Persian Gulf with its next India fleet. However, when the party arrived in Deal on 20 April 1626, they found the company's ships had already left. After a further year in England, Cotton, Shirley, and his wife boarded 'The Star' in March 1627 for the voyage to Persia. Naqd Ali Beg returned home on 'The Hart' only to die from an overdose of opium on 30 November, the day before the fleet reached Swally Road. 
It was not until May 1628 that Shirley finally reached Ashraf, where he was favourably received by the shah late in the month. Although he followed when the shah moved his court to Qazvin in June, he had no further audience with the potentate. Suffering from a fever, Robert died on 13 July 1628 at Qazvin, where he was buried by his friends under the threshold of his house. Lady Shirley left Persia shortly afterwards and stayed in Constantinople for three years before retiring to Rome in December 1634. In 1658 she had her husband's remains reburied in the church of Santa Maria in Trastevere, where she herself was buried in 1668. 


@@@@@


doc= 25434


Shirley, Sir Robert, fourth baronet (1629-1656), royalist conspirator, was the second son of Sir Henry Shirley, second baronet (1589-1633), of Eatington, Warwickshire, and Staunton Harold, Leicestershire, and his wife, Dorothy Devereux (1600-1636) ['see 'Stafford, Lady Dorothy], second daughter of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. A descendant of the ancient family seated at Eatington, his father and grandparents were recusants, but he was brought up within the Church of England by his mother. He was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on 12 August 1645. The following year, on the death of his elder brother, Charles, he inherited the baronetcy and also married, against the wishes of his family, Katharine (died 1672), daughter of Humphrey Okeover, of Okeover, Staffordshire. They would have five children. 
Following the death of his uncle, the earl of Essex, Shirley received a moiety of the large possessions of the Devereux family in England and Ireland. After the execution of Charles I he worked in close contact with those aiming for the restoration of monarch and church. He first clashed with the government in 1648 when he confronted soldiers at the parliamentary garrison at Ashby-de-la-Zouch. His association with Staffordshire opponents of the republican regime led to his first imprisonment in the Tower of London on 4 May 1650 and the sequestration of his estates, though he was soon released and the sequestration lifted. In 1654 he was involved in attending secret meetings to support the exiled king by royalists living in the midland counties, and had become the 'chief man in the Royalist organization' in his area (Underdown, 144), and a recipient of arms. He was again arrested and sent to the Tower. While there he was appointed the royalists' financial agent, having already given substantial sums for the king's service. From there too, in 1656, he drew up proposals for royalist reorganization on the basis of complete identification of the royal cause with the Church of England, urging that 'whosoever in these times of persecution professes himself a son of the Church will also by the same principles be a loyal subject'. With clergy acting as agents, bishops would be required to resume their episcopal responsibilities, and the laity must refuse any ministry by ministers lacking episcopal ordination. Weekly communions were advocated, as were alms to provide for the support of the clergy, but the proposals failed to bear fruit. 
Shirley had sheltered, supported, and employed as his chaplains many of the deprived clergy, among them Robert Mapletoft, Gilbert Sheldon, Henry Hammond, and Peter Gunning. From 1653 he rebuilt the church at Staunton Harold in pure Gothic. The inscription noted 'In the year 1653 when all things Sacred were throughout the nation Either demolisht or profaned Sir Robert Shirley Barronet, Founded this Church; whose singular praise it is to have done the best thing in the worst times and hoped them in the most callamitous' (Lacy, 25). Although he died before the whole church was finished he left explicit instructions in his will as to how the church, the interior especially, should be completed. 
A few days before his death in the Tower on 28 November 1656, probably of smallpox, Shirley set apart $600 per annum for the king's cause. The funeral oration by Sheldon, his chaplain, had an apt text, 'Luke' 7: 5, 'He loved our nation and he hath built us a synagogue'. He was buried on 22 December at the church at Breedon on the Hill, Leicestershire, the burial place of his ancestors, and in 1661 his remains were removed to Staunton Harold and buried in the chancel of Holy Trinity Church. In his will he sought to ensure that any profits he had made from church lands or tithes were shared among the distressed orthodox clergy. Writing to Secretary Nicholas on 17 December 1656 Hyde expressed his hopes that 'the news may not be true of the honest gentleman in the Tower, whose loss at this time cannot be repaired' ('Clarendon State Papers', 3.215). 


@@@@@


doc= 25435


Sherley, Sir Thomas (c.1542-1612), politician and courtier, was the eldest of three children born to William Sherley ('c'.1498-1551), a gentleman of Wiston, Sussex, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Isley of Sundridge, Kent. Nothing is known of his education; he did not, as sometimes claimed, matriculate as a fellow commoner from Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1561. Sherley married, about 1559, Anne ('c'.1542-1623), daughter of Sir Thomas Kempe of Wye, Kent. They had twelve children, including three adventurous sons: Sir Thomas Sherley (1564-1633/4), Sir Anthony Sherley (1565-1636?), and Robert Shirley (c.1581-1628). Herbert referred to the Sherleys as 'A family not needing hyperboles' (Shirley, 234). Three other children died in infancy but six daughters survived, Jane ('b'. 1571) becoming the grandmother of Sir Thomas Overbury. 
Sherley was elected MP for Sussex in 1572, 1584, and 1593; he sat for Steyning, his pocket borough, in 1601 and 1604. He was appointed deputy lieutenant of the county in 1569, and was only removed from the list in 1601. He had a town house in Blackfriars and was patronized by Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. The Sherleys have had the reputation of being a recusant family, but there is no proof that Sir Thomas had Roman Catholic tendencies. He was related by marriage to several leading local families, some of whom were recusants who leased small parts of his lands. A distant kinsman and namesake, Sir Thomas Shirley of St Botolph's Bridge, Huntingdonshire, attributed the misfortunes which befell Sherley to his having deserted 'the ancient religion', but there is no proof for this assertion. Sherley was a commissioner for recusancy in 1580 and a commissioner for disarming recusants in 1585. After the Throckmorton conspiracy, Anne, wife of Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, gave birth to her daughter at Wiston in April 1584, where she was kept in custody by Sherley for a year. 
Knighted by Queen Elizabeth at Rye on 12 August 1573, Sherley's raised social status dictated the need for a larger country residence. The new house at Wiston was built between 1573 and 1575, probably on or near the site of the old part-stone manor house mentioned in 1357. From November 1577 Sherley served as sheriff of Sussex and Surrey for a year. He was also a justice of the peace for many years, together with his near neighbour Sir Thomas Bishop of Parham, referred to in 1587 as 'good justyces -- young men'. Sherley's leased farms supplied him with an annual income of about $1000. He also had connections with the Sussex iron industry, and a furnace erected in 1580 was supplied with wood granted to him under a patent of 1578. In 1588 he was one of fifteen Sussex gentry to pay the highest rate to the Armada fund of $100, though in the same year the sheriff seized many of his goods at Wiston (including 71 feather beds and 32 Turkish carpets) for unpaid debts. He had by now begun on the downward spiral that led to his bankruptcy and disgrace in 1597. 
Sherley accompanied the earl of Leicester to the Low Countries in 1585 to aid the rebellion against Spain. He acted as Leicester's go-between with Queen Elizabeth early in 1586 when she was angered that her favourite had accepted the governorship of the United Provinces without consulting her. Made joint treasurer-at-war with William Huddleston in the summer of 1586, Sherley was appointed sole treasurer by Queen Elizabeth on 27 February 1587. He had taken his two eldest sons, Thomas and Anthony, with him, and the three of them each retained a company, which enabled Sherley to engage in much false accounting. He used numerous methods to acquire for himself the money sent out by Lord Burghley to pay debts and equip the troops. Burghley noted in June 1587 that $30,000 had been given to Sherley to pay the debts of the expedition, restore the cavalry to good order, and pay all lendings (half pay for the soldiery) until September. At the end of June Sherley had only $3000 left instead of an expected $18,000. He had spent $8000 before he left England. The enormous sum of $1.5 million is said to have passed through his hands during the ten years he was treasurer-at-war, of which large amounts disappeared into his own pockets. One of his captains revealed that Sherley loaned out much of the cash at interest. Sherley also bought up soldiers' claims to back pay and paid himself the full amount due. Peregrine Bertie, Lord Willoughby, commander of the English forces after Leicester's departure for England in December 1587, believed Sherley was making $20,000 per annum. 
Suspicious of his treasurer, Burghley constantly checked on Sherley, and finally the queen reduced his salary. By March 1597 he was bankrupt: 'the Queen is greatly incensed and disquieted with Sir Thomas Sherley's doings... he owes the Queen more than he is worth', wrote a contemporary (Davies, 44). In April he was sent to the Fleet prison and probably released in January 1598. He was finally charged with owing the queen $35,175, a mere fraction of what had been embezzled. Of this sum $12,702 was excused and $10,000 recovered by seizing Sherley's goods and putting extents on his lands. He had also obtained questionable patents on the lands of Norwich Cathedral between 1583 and 1586, paying $300 for lands worth $2000 p.a. The dean of Norwich endeavoured to reach an agreement with him, describing Sherley in 1588 as 'promising much but of a contrary mind to perform nothing... he will so plainly deny the receipt of my letters' (Shirley, 254-5). Sherley also acquired a patent to sell black people from England to Spain and Portugal which did not prosper. 
On 20 August 1602 the Wiston estate was sequestrated by the crown. The queen finally lost patience when Sherley reneged on the arrangements to repay his debts. He was able to retrieve his lands in July 1604, when three relatives stood surety for him. Shortly before this, on 15 March 1604, he was again in trouble; elected MP for Steyning, he was riding through London with King James prior to the opening of parliament a few days later when he was arrested for debt by a City goldsmith and taken to the Fleet. This raised the whole question of the privilege of freedom from arrest for MPs, and after several weeks of parliamentary activity, a special bill was passed in haste through both Houses. Sherley was released and triumphantly took his seat. The final form of this law was fixed in 1604 and is known as Shirley's case. 
In 1610 Sherley was involved in a scheme for creating a new class of knights, which came to nothing. He is also reputed, together with Sir Robert Cotton, to have created the new honour of baronet, sold by the crown for $1096 in 1611. He obtained no financial advantage from this, not surprisingly in view of his unpaid debts. In 1615, three years after his death, his eldest son Sir Thomas wrote to the king: 'My Father (being a man of most excellent and working wit), did find out the device for the making of Baronets, which brought to your Majesty's coffers well nigh a hundred thousand pounds for which he was promised... good recompence which he never had. (Davies, 240)' Shortly before his father's demise in October 1612, Sherley the younger tried to commit suicide while in a debtors' prison. Six months later the Sherley inheritance -- a burden of debt -- fell on him like a ton weight. However, his father had done him a posthumous good turn in that he was able to claim immunity from prison by serving as an MP. 
Sir Thomas Sherley died in October 1612, aged about seventy. The black marble obituary tablet from what must have been a grand memorial lies broken in the granary above the Wiston House stables. In 1851 it was said to be on the eastern wall of the family burial place, St Mary's Chapel in St Michael's Church at Wiston (now known as St Mary's Church), surmounted by his effigy and that of his wife, with the arms of his six daughters below. The monument itself may have been damaged during the civil war, and again during church restoration in 1862. The kneeling figures of Sherley and his wife, Anne, their noses and hands chopped off, have been placed on a window sill in the southern aisle of the church. Faint traces of colour remain on the stone. The damaged coat of arms from the monument is in the possession of the Wiston estate office. 
It has been incorrectly assumed that the Wiston estate was sold by Sherley's eldest son to Sir John Fagge. James I gave the estate to his favourite the earl of Somerset in 1615. In 1622 it was purchased by Lionel Cranfield. He paid off the creditors of the earl of Somerset with $7000, gave $5400 (by instalments) to Sir Thomas Sherley the younger, paid $400 to Sherley the elder's daughter Cecily, and provided an annuity of $400 for Dame Anne, who spent the last year of her life partly at Parham House with her neighbour Lady Bishop, and partly in London. Wiston House has been leased to the Foreign Office as a conference centre, known as Wilton Park, since 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 25436


Sherley, Sir Thomas (1564-1633/4), privateer and travel writer, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Sherley (c.1542-1612) of Wiston, Sussex, and his wife, Anne Kempe ('c'.1542-1623), daughter of Sir Thomas Kempe of Olantigh, Kent. Sir Anthony Sherley and Robert Shirley, Count Shirley, were his younger brothers. Together the three brothers through their exploits in Persia and the Mediterranean earned a reputation in their day in pamphlet and play as champions of Christendom against the Turk. To a more jaundiced twentieth-century eye 'The Sherleys all had unlimited bravura and glib sales talk, everything but a capacity to turn an honest penny' (Prestwich, 390). 
Thomas Sherley matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1579, but left without graduating. In November 1581 he was admitted to the Inner Temple. In 1584 he was returned for the borough of Steyning, Sussex, for which he was to sit in three other parliaments (those of 1593, 1614, and 1621). In 1585 Thomas Sherley accompanied his brother Anthony and his father to the Low Countries, where he commanded a company of cavalry. In January 1588 he saw his only engagement. Encamped outside the walls of the city of Zwolle, Thomas's company was attacked late one evening after a day spent drinking. In the ensuing battle, only twenty horses and thirty men escaped slaughter at the hands of the Spanish. Despite the fact that Sherley's incompetence was largely to blame for this deadly fiasco, the privy council granted him an allowance to rebuild his company. Within two months Thomas had returned to England and his brother Anthony had taken command of the remnants of his company. 
Sherley did not stay in England for long, for he entered service in Ireland where he was knighted by Lord Deputy William Fitzwilliam on 26 October 1589. Back in England, Sherley frequented the court, where he succumbed to the charms of a wealthy widow, Frances, Lady Stourton, the sister of Lord Cobham and sister-in-law of Robert Cecil. Although both families favoured the match, Sherley's gaze proved fickle as he met and secretly married Frances Vavasour, the daughter of Sir Thomas Vavasour, in the summer of 1591. But in order to avoid offending his father he still outwardly confessed his intentions towards Lady Stourton. However, in August 1591, while on progress with the court, the queen found out about the match and was furious. Sherley was sent to the Marshalsea prison where he remained until early 1592. 
After serving in the parliament of 1593 Sherley later that year returned to the Low Countries as a captain. The increasingly acute financial difficulties of his family forced him to relinquish his command to his brother-in-law Thomas Vavasour. In 1598 he fitted out a fleet to cruise the seas in search of prizes. Spending the summer off the Portuguese coast, he succeeded in capturing four Lubeck ships, and bringing them back to Portsmouth. Although the freight was Spanish the privy council determined that because the ships belonged to a friendly port, they must be returned. Sherley likely received no return on this venture. Undeterred, he set out again late in 1598 but bad weather damaged his ships and he lost one of his prizes. He was forced to borrow money on the security of his ship in order to get home. Nor did his luck improve, for early in 1599 he captured two more ships, the contents of which the privy council deemed the property of foreign merchants resident in London; Sherley was forced to transport them to the capital and restore anything lost. 
Sherley's third privateering voyage was probably his most profitable, for in early 1600 he captured two rich prizes, one of which, a merchantman loaded in the West Indies, was deemed to be good. After this he seems to have contented himself in England for a short while. In the elections to the 1601 parliament his father took the seat in Steyning which the family controlled, but Thomas was returned as MP for both Bramber and Hastings, choosing to sit for the latter. 
In March 1602 Sherley returned to the seas but decided to avoid the difficulties of privateering (or piracy) on the high seas, concentrating instead on raiding coastal areas. Ten days after leaving Southampton in May, however, he was forced back to port for want of victuals. Selling four of his ships to outfit his remaining two, he proceeded to cruise the Portuguese coast, sacking two small Portuguese hamlets. According to the letter-writer John Chamberlain, when Thomas returned he hurried to court as if he had succeeded in taking Seville. 
In the autumn of 1602 Sherley staked the balance of the credit he could raise from his estate on a final voyage, deciding to cruise the Mediterranean. Off Gibraltar, he took a Flemish ship but the prize proved to hold little. Over the following months his crew became mutinous and at least two of his fleet departed in the night. In February 1603 the remains of his force were driven by contrary winds to the island of Kea, the most north-westerly of the Cyclades Islands and Ottoman territory. Under cover of darkness Sherley and his force marched on the city, where he and two other Englishmen were captured. The rest of his crew fled, setting sail without making any attempt at rescue. Without their captain, they captured a rich Venetian galleon in late February 1603, severely complicating the precarious position of Thomas's brother Anthony in Venice where the senate was unaware that the fleet was acting independently. 
A month after his capture Sherley was taken to Negroponte, and late in July he was moved to Constantinople. Initially his imprisonment was wretched, but in April 1604 some money arrived from his father and he was able to purchase a chamber. However, he remained captive until 6 December 1605, when, after a direct appeal from James I, he was released. The observations he made while returning to England in the spring of 1606 form the content of his 'Discours of the Turkes'. Predictably the tone of this work befits that of one whose author had just been thirty-three months in captivity, for the first half is given over to an ethnography of the Turks which lapses into an especially virulent invective against Turkish vice and irreligion. Sherley also goes to some length to stress that a united effort by all the Christian princes of Europe might succeed in dislodging Ottoman power; this, he feels, would particularly benefit the English whose ships could be used to transport the invaders. The remainder of the work is unremarkable and details the author's passage back to England through Italy and Germany. Although not published until 1936 the pronounced similarity in its phrasing, especially in its section devoted to the origin of the Turks, suggests that Sherley's 'Discours' was one of the sources used by Anthony Nixon for his 'Three English Brothers' (1607), a work perhaps owing more to the genre of panegyric than to history. In turn Nixon's work formed the basis for a short and unremarkable play, more noted for its liveliness than its adherence to the dramatic unities, written by John Day and performed in the same year as Nixon's book was published, 'The Travailes of the Three English Brothers'. 
Back in England, Sherley was in gaol again by September 1607, probably for trying to interfere with the operations of the Levant Company. In August 1611 he was made a prisoner of the king's bench as an insolvent debtor. In the depths of despair he tried to poison himself in the summer of 1612. On his release he was elected to parliament for Steyning in 1614. Following the death of his first wife, Frances, at some point between 1610 and 1615, Sherley married for a second time on 2 December 1617. His new wife was a widow, Judith Taylor, the daughter of William Bennet of London, a woman whose reputation for promiscuity was a subject of gossip. With his first wife Sherley had four daughters and three sons (of whom one was the playwright Henry Shirley, run through with a sword by Sir Edward Bishop in the course of a quarrel over debts in 1627); with his second he had a further five sons and six daughters. 
In 1622, shortly before his mother's death, Sherley sold Wiston to Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex, and retired to the Isle of Wight, where he lived at Cosham House, Newport, holding the position of keeper of the royal park. Still weighed down by debt, Sherley resorted to the charity of Sir John Oglander, a kinsman on his mother's side, who lent him money freely 'as his kinsman and friend', but with experience learnt wariness: 'yet I knew him to be so ill a paymaster that I was forced to make him honest by taking a pawn for my money' (Bamford, 238). According to Oglander's commonplace book Sherley died on the Isle of Wight in 1633 (on old-style dating, so between 25 March 1633 and 25 March 1634). 


@@@@@


doc= 25437


Sir Thomas Shirley, first baronet (1727-1800), army officer and colonial governor, was born in London in 1727 and accompanied his parents to Boston. He was enrolled in the Boston Latin school in 1737 but evinced little taste for classical learning. His father appointed him a captain in the British army in 1745. He was promoted major in 1759, and in 1767 succeeded his father as governor of the Bahama Islands. A year later he and his bride, Anna Maria Weston, took up residence there. He was appointed governor of Dominica in 1774. During the American War of Independence he and his family were prisoners of war for a time. In 1781 he was commissioned colonel of the 91st regiment and made governor of the Leeward Islands. He was created a baronet on 27 June 1786, and was promoted lieutenant-general in 1793 and general five years later. He died at Bath on 11 February 1800 and was succeeded in his title by his second son, William Warden Shirley. 


@@@@@


doc= 25438


Shirley, Walter (1725-1786), Methodist preacher and hymn writer, the fourth son of the Hon. Laurence Shirley (1693-1743) and Anne (died 1782), daughter of Sir Walter Clarges, was born on 23 September 1725 and baptized at Doveridge, Derbyshire, on 7 October. His father was the youngest son of Robert, first Earl Ferrers, by his first wife, Elizabeth Washington. Little is known of Shirley's early life, which may possibly have been spent in Ireland, but he entered New College, Oxford, in 1742 and graduated in 1746. Almost immediately he was ordained and became rector of Loughrea, co. Galway. There he settled into the life of an Irish country parson. However, at some date before 1755 he encountered the Methodists, possibly during one of John Wesley's brief visits to Ireland, and was converted. In 1755, when on a visit to England, probably to see his brother Laurence Shirley, fourth Earl Ferrers, at Staunton Harold, he met Francis, tenth earl of Huntingdon, who provided him with an introduction to his mother (Shirley's first cousin), Selina, countess dowager of Huntingdon, whose efforts to aid the Calvinistic Methodists were just beginning. Family quarrels and legal disputes had disrupted the Shirley family and Lady Huntingdon welcomed the first member of her own family to follow her example and join the ranks of the Calvinistic Methodists. 
Walter Shirley soon came to divide his time between Ireland, where he employed a series of evangelical curates to serve Loughrea, and England, where, with headquarters at Bath, he served the increasing number of chapels built or supported by Lady Huntingdon. Shirley was the first and probably the best of her agents in this work since his 'conciliatory temper' (E. P. Shirley, 199) enabled him to settle problems in the congregations and to soothe the countess's readiness to complain of their behaviour. She also consulted him about the affairs of the college which she founded in 1768 at Trefeca, near Brecon, to train evangelical ministers. In Ireland, Shirley met with increasing opposition, especially from his diocesan, who cancelled the licence of one of his curates, Richard De Courcy, and preached against Shirley from his own pulpit at Loughrea. 
In 1770, after George Whitefield's death, Lady Huntingdon appointed Shirley to succeed him as one of her chaplains. Soon afterwards she entrusted him with the delicate task of trying to reconcile the differences between the Wesleyans and the Calvinists -- a duty formerly undertaken by Whitefield and Howell Harris. At his conference in 1770 John Wesley had again raised the question of justification by faith or works and implied that the Calvinists were antinomians. Lady Huntingdon proposed that Shirley should lead a delegation of ministers and laymen to the 1771 conference at Bristol either to meet with the members or to debate the subject afterwards. John Wesley reluctantly allowed the delegation to attend the last day of the conference and a statement was drawn up and signed by those present withdrawing the objectionable parts of the 1770 resolution. However, Wesley almost immediately insisted on publishing, against the author's own wishes, John Fletcher's manuscript 'Checks against antinomianism', which was written before the agreement. This revived the controversy and led to violent attacks by the Calvinists Toplady and Romaine on Wesley, despite all the efforts of Walter Shirley. It marked the end of all co-operation between the two parties. 
Shirley's hymn writing and his part in the compilation of Lady Huntingdon's early hymnbooks is somewhat obscure. Julian lists only five hymns written by him, but it is clear from his letters to the countess that he played an important part in revising and improving the hymns and, in conjunction with Benjamin Milgrove of Bath, in providing suitable tunes. Shirley's only other publications were 'Gospel Repentance' (1760), 'Twelve Sermons', with a poetical appendix (1761), and an account of the 1771 conference. 
Walter Shirley married Henrietta Maria Phillips (died 1792), daughter of John Phillips of Dublin, on 27 August 1766. They had two sons -- John and Walter, born at Loughrea on 26 September 1767 and 11 October 1768 -- and three daughters -- Fanny and Henrietta, born at Bath on 6 May 1770 and 11 August 1772, and Ann-Augusta, born on 29 November 1775. Walter Shirley died in Dublin on 7 April 1786 and was buried in the city's St Mary's Church. He was survived by his wife, who died on 15 December 1792. His eldest son, John, predeceased him, leaving Walter Shirley junior as his executor. Unfortunately the family and legal disputes of the Shirleys meant that there was no family fortune, and attempts to improve Walter Shirley's income in his lifetime were unsuccessful. Lady Huntingdon gave him the advowson of Aldwincle All Saints, Northamptonshire, but the incumbent, Thomas Haweis, survived him by more than thirty years. Lord Dartmouth attempted to find an English living which he could exchange for Loughrea, but without success. As a result Walter junior spent much of his life as a penniless curate never far from bankruptcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 25439


Shirley, Walter Augustus (1797-1847), bishop of Sodor and Man, was born on 30 May 1797 at Westport, co. Mayo, Ireland, where his father was curate. He was the only son of Walter Shirley (1768-1860) and his wife, Alicia, the daughter of Sir Edward Newenham. His grandfather, also Walter Shirley (1725-1786), was a cousin and collaborator of the countess of Huntingdon. At the age of nine Shirley was placed under the care of the Revd Legh Richmond, but as he seemed to be making little progress he was soon sent to a school at Linton in Cambridgeshire, and in 1809 he became a scholar of Winchester College. Six years later he was elected to a fellowship at New College, Oxford, which he held until 1828, and graduated BA (1819) and MA (1823). In 1822 he gained the chancellor's English essay prize for an essay entitled 'On the study of moral evidence'. 
Immediately after his ordination in 1820 Shirley took charge of the parish of Woodford, Northamptonshire, one of the livings held by his father. The following year he became curate of Parwich in Derbyshire, and in 1822 he was appointed lecturer at Ashbourne and curate of Atlow. He acted as English chaplain at Rome in the winter of 1826, where he got to know Thomas Erskine, the painter Charles Eastlake, and Baron von Bunsen, the German diplomat, and his wife, Frances. On 4 September 1827 in Paris he married Maria (died 1854), daughter of William Waddington of Impington Hall, Cambridgeshire. They had a daughter and a son, Walter Waddington Shirley (1828-1866), afterwards regius professor of ecclesiastical history at Oxford. In 1828 he succeeded his father as vicar of Shirley in Derbyshire, the ancient estate of the family, combining it with the adjoining parish of Brailsford from 1839 and with the archdeaconry of Derby from 1840. He was also rector of Whiston, Yorkshire, from 1837 to 1839. 
In November 1846 Shirley was appointed bishop of Sodor and Man by Lord John Russell, but because he was seriously ill, the consecration was delayed until 10 January 1847. He had been elected Bampton lecturer at Oxford for that year, but lived only long enough to deliver two of the lectures, which with two others (undelivered) were published posthumously as 'The Supremacy of Holy Scripture' (1847). 
Shirley received a strict evangelical upbringing, but his kindly disposition prevented him from running to extremes of partisanship. Indeed in 1829 he alienated some of his friends by his outspoken advocacy of Catholic emancipation, as in later years he estranged others by refusing to support extreme measures against the Tractarians. In politics he was a constitutional whig, and both as an incumbent and as an archdeacon he exercised an energetic and effective ministry. He died at Bishop's Court, Isle of Man, on 21 April 1847, and eight days later was buried in the family vault of the church at Shirley. 


@@@@@


doc= 25440


Shirley, Walter Waddington (1828-1866), ecclesiastical historian, the only son of Walter Augustus Shirley (1797-1847), bishop of Sodor and Man, and his wife, Maria (died 1854), daughter of William Waddington of Impington Hall, Cambridgeshire, was born at Shirley, Derbyshire, on 24 July 1828. He was educated at Rugby School under Thomas Arnold. His closest friend at school and throughout his life was his cousin, William Henry Waddington, later the French foreign minister. In June 1846 Shirley matriculated at University College, Oxford, but in the following year he migrated to Wadham College, where he had gained a scholarship. He obtained a first class in mathematics in 1851, and in 1852 was elected a fellow of his college. He was compelled to vacate his fellowship three years later, when his mother's death brought him into possession of a small landed property. He married on 4 July 1855 Philippa, daughter of Samuel Knight, of Impington, Cambridgeshire. They had three daughters and three sons, one of whom died young. The eldest surviving son, Walter Knight Shirley, succeeded to the earldom of Ferrers, as the eleventh earl, in 1907. 
From 1855 to 1863 Shirley was tutor and mathematical lecturer at Wadham. It was during this period that he began to devote his greatest energy to historical study. A patient and impartial researcher, the master of a clear and dignified style, he came to be regarded by many of his contemporaries, in both England and Germany, as one of the ablest of the new kind of Oxford historian, employing carefully researched evidence and maintaining a detached and objective stance. In 1858 his edition of 'Fasciculi Zizaniorum magistri Johannis Wyclif' was published in the 'Rolls Series'. His introduction attracted the admiration of historical students though it was savagely reviewed in 'The Athenaeum' by a reviewer who resented what he called Shirley's 'endeavour to exhibit Wycliffe as little of a Reformer as possible'. Thereafter he commenced the preparation of a life of Wyclif which he did not live to complete. In 1865, however, he published a 'Catalogue of the Original Works of John Wiclif' and in 1862 he edited for the 'Rolls Series' 'Royal and other Historical Letters Illustrative of the Reign of Henry III', the master of the rolls, Lord Romilly, thereby demonstrating continued confidence in the scholarship exhibited in Shirley's earlier volume for the series. There has been no edition of 'Fasciculi zizaniorum' since Shirley's and it is still very widely used though it suffers somewhat, as one would expect, from the fact that the work was done as long ago as the mid-nineteenth century. His 'Catalogue', on the other hand, has been rendered out of date by more recent research and scholarship. 
Shirley's theological views underwent considerable change and began to lean more towards the opinions of the Tractarians. Having been in his early days a disciple of Arnold, he ultimately came to regard 'undogmatic Christianity' as a contradiction in terms. Finally, in May 1863, he preached in the university church a sermon -- which created a great impression at the time of its delivery and was subsequently published -- in which he sought to demonstrate the unreasonableness of Arnold's teaching. Two or three months after the delivery of this sermon he was made regius professor of ecclesiastical history and canon of Christ Church. His appointment met with general approval among people of very divergent views because he was regarded as scrupulously fair in controversy and free from party spirit and because of the mingled strength and simplicity of his character. He was one of the pioneers of the university extension movement, and played a prominent part in the early history of the founding of Keble College. His promising career was cut short at the age of thirty-eight. He died on 20 November 1866 at the Canon's House, Christ Church, Oxford. 
The theological position which Shirley occupied at the time of his death was still regarded by him as a provisional one, as he believed that any moral or intellectual position should always be open to revision. In addition to the works already mentioned, he published a lecture, 'Scholasticism', delivered before the University of Oxford in 1866. After his death a small volume of his writings, edited by William Bright and entitled 'Some Account of the Church in the Apostolic Age', was published by the Clarendon Press. 


@@@@@


doc= 25441


Washington Shirley, fifth Earl Ferrers (1722-1778), naval officer, was born on 26 May 1722, and entered the navy around 1738. He was made second lieutenant on 6 January 1741, promoted first lieutenant on 9 January 1746, and post captain on 19 April 1746. On 1 December 1747 he married Anne (1722/3-1791), daughter of John Elliot, of Plymouth, Devon, at St George's, East Stonehouse, Devon. He took his seat in the House of Lords a fortnight after his brother's execution (19 May 1760), and by a patent of 6 December 1763 George III granted to him the family estates which had been forfeited by his brother as a felon. This patent was confirmed by act of parliament in 1771. Ferrers was promoted rear-admiral of the white on 31 March, vice-admiral of the blue on 7 December 1775, and vice-admiral of the white on 29 January 1778. Casanova, visiting London, was surprised that he was not 'dishonoured' (Casanova, 5.203), or ostracized, as a result of his brother's crime. 


@@@@@


doc= 25442


Shirley, William (1694-1771), colonial governor and army officer, was born on 2 December 1694 at Preston, Sussex, the son of William Shirley (1667-1701), London merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Godman of Ote Hall, Wivelsfield, Sussex. He grew up in a family with aristocratic pretensions but without the economic wherewithal to support that style of life. His father died when he was very young, and William was left with relatively little property. He attended the Merchant Taylors' School in London and Pembroke College, Cambridge, as a pensioner, graduating BA in 1715. He entered the Inner Temple in 1714 and was called to the bar on 20 July 1720, practising law for the next eleven years. He was a clerk in the London government from 1717 to 1719. Some time before 1720 he married Frances, daughter and heir of Francis Barker, a London merchant. They had nine children before she died on 31 August 1745. A daughter, Frances, also died in 1745. Although he achieved a good legal reputation and made a number of influential friends, he did not prosper financially. He lost money on the South Sea Bubble and other speculative fiascos, and grew determined to recoup his fortunes in American colonial administration. 
In 1731 Shirley emigrated with his family to Boston, Massachusetts, seeking a place in government. Before long he had secured the patronage of his friend Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, who had connections in the ministry of Sir Robert Walpole. In 1733 Shirley was appointed judge of the vice-admiralty court and shortly thereafter advocate-general of that court. He vigorously attempted to enforce British trade laws while also developing a private law practice and petitioning officials in London for various offices without success. He became associated with a group of colonial businessmen and landowners who were opposed to the governor, Jonathan Belcher, and he began to undermine Belcher's position. He dispatched his wife to England with instructions to petition the duke of Newcastle, then secretary of state, for various offices and emoluments for him. After she had made several unsuccessful attempts, she began disparaging Belcher and petitioning for her husband's appointment in his stead. With the assistance of powerful allies in both London and Boston, she succeeded on 25 May 1741 in having Belcher dismissed and Shirley commissioned governor of Massachusetts. 
Confronted with economic difficulties left to him by his predecessor, Shirley rose to the occasion and quickly established a reputation as an astute servant of the crown. He eliminated various competing banks and restored a sound currency without antagonizing anyone unduly, thereby winning the respect of both the colonists and his superiors in London. Building on this success, he forged a powerful following in Massachusetts by gaining privileges for leading colonists from the British government in exchange for their co-operation. He secured for them war contracts for provisions, military commissions, and civil positions, and prevailed upon Newcastle to relax enforcement of the trade laws. He also built up the colony's defences by persuading the general court to appropriate money for the repair of Castle William and other fortifications in Massachusetts. Hence, when Britain declared war upon France in 1744, he had put the colony on a sound financial footing and in a reasonable state of defence. Seeing the war as an opportunity to improve the colonists' strategic and economic situation, he urged the ministry to seize the weakly held French fortress of Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island. Undeterred by the lack of support or encouragement from Britain, he proposed to the general court of Massachusetts that an expedition be organized by the New England colonies. He ably negotiated with all the parties to cobble together an expedition, to be led by William Pepperrell with the assistance of a British fleet under Commodore Peter Warren. The fortress fell on 17 June 1745, and Shirley was rewarded by being appointed colonel of a British regiment to be recruited from New England provincial troops. In the late 1740s he used hard currency provided by parliament as reimbursement for war expenses to replace some of the paper money of Massachusetts. 
The war ended in 1748, and a year later Shirley was appointed to a commission meeting in Paris to determine the boundary between New England and French Canada. Shortly after his arrival in France he married a young Frenchwoman named Julie, the daughter of his landlord; they had no children. The negotiations went on interminably, with Shirley attempting to push the boundaries of British North America into the Ohio valley. Sensing that war between Britain and France would soon break out again, he returned to Massachusetts in 1753. In January 1754 he wrote to the ministry in London, urging the necessity of uniting the colonies and emphasizing the importance of Crown Point (Ticonderoga) to colonial defence. In the summer he led an expedition up the Kennebec River, vainly seeking Frenchmen to fight, and he laid plans to attack the French in eastern Canada. In February 1755 he was promoted major-general, as the British ministry laid plans for all-out war with the French in America. Two months later he attended a council of war with the commander of the British forces in America, General Edward Braddock, and four other governors in Alexandria, Virginia, where a concerted plan of action against the French was agreed upon. Braddock appointed Shirley his second-in-command, then marched against Fort Duquesne while Shirley led an unsuccessful expedition against Niagara. When Braddock was killed in a French ambush in July 1755, Shirley became commander-in-chief, but for the remainder of the year managed only a few military gains in Nova Scotia. His eldest son, William, had been killed while serving as Braddock's secretary, and his second son John had died of fever during the Niagara campaign. 
In 1756, with limited support from Britain, Shirley laid plans for another campaign against the French but acted indecisively in carrying them out. Hence he lost Fort Oswego to the enemy. In July 1756 he was replaced as commander-in-chief by John Campbell, fourth earl of Loudoun, and ordered home to answer for his mismanagement of military affairs and for irregularities in his financial accounts. Officials in the war office wanted to court-martial Shirley, but lack of evidence forced the dropping of all charges in the autumn of 1757. Meantime he had been removed as governor of Massachusetts. In late 1758 he was promoted lieutenant-general and given the governorship of the Bahama Islands. Taking up residence in December 1759, he spent the next eight years working to suppress smuggling, improve education, and bolster the islands' defences. In 1767 he relinquished his office to his son, Thomas ['see below'], and retired on the half pay of a colonel. Two years later he returned to his country estate, Shirley Place, in Roxbury, Massachusetts. There on 24 March 1771 he died. He was buried on 1 April in King's Chapel, Boston, beside the bodies of his first wife and daughter. 
The third and only surviving son of William and Frances Shirley, 


@@@@@


doc= 25443


Shirley, William (fl. 1739-1777), playwright, was also a merchant who for many years conducted business in Portugal. In 1753 he argued with the English consul at Lisbon, which resulted in an order from the Portuguese government to leave the country within five days. From that time he lived in London, though he occasionally went abroad, and even revisited Portugal, where he narrowly escaped with his life in the earthquake of 1755. He was an authority on affairs of trade and international commerce, and wrote several letters in the 'Daily Gazetteer', signed Lusitanicus, on the relations of Portugal and Britain. He also wrote on currency in Sir William Browne's 'Proposal on our Coin' (1771); and produced his 'Observations on a Pamphlet Lately Published Concerning a Portuguese Conspiracy' (1759). 
Shirley also wrote plays, but his output was far greater than his talent. His earliest play was a tragedy called 'The Parricide' which appeared at Covent Garden on 17 January 1739, but was never performed again as there was a riot in the audience. Shirley defends himself in a later published preface to the work, claiming that the riot was planned: 'their expelling the ladies from the pit, and sending for wine to drink, were likewise strong indications of their arbitrary and violent dispositions', and says 'faulty as it is, it deserv'd a better fate than it met with'. Genest, on the other hand, finds 'nothing in it either pleasing or interesting', and this seems to be the view which has lasted. 
Shirley's next play, 'King Pepin's Campaign', was performed at Drury Lane in 1745 and published in 1755, but the reviews felt that for a burlesque comedy it was sadly lacking in humour. After this he wrote 'Edward the Black Prince', which appeared at Drury Lane on 6 January 1750, with David Garrick in the part of Edward and Spranger Barry as the French nobleman, Lord Ribemont. Opinions were mixed: the audience mostly applauded, while groaning at the hackneyed love scenes; others found it dull and considered it to be an unsuitable vehicle for an actor such as Garrick. Shirley soon afterwards quarrelled with Garrick and took his revenge in 1758 by printing a pamphlet entitled 'Brief Remarks on the Original and Present State of the Drama', with a humorous dialogue called 'Hecate's Prophecy', in which Garrick was criticized under the name of Roscius. 
The two men seem, however, to have been reconciled, for when new proprietors acquired Drury Lane from Garrick in 1776, one of the terms of sale was that a new piece by William Shirley be performed as soon as possible. 'The Roman Sacrifice' opened on 18 December 1777, but closed after four nights of decreasing audiences. According to Horace Walpole it was 'without a tolerable line' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 23 Dec 1777). Shirley wrote several other plays which were not published; nothing further is known about his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 25444


Shirreff, Emily Anne Eliza (1814-1897), educationist and writer, was born on 3 November 1814, the second of four daughters and two sons born to Rear-Admiral William Henry Shirreff (1785-1847), of Huguenot ancestry, commander of the Portsmouth Dockyard at the time of his death in 1847, and Elizabeth Anne, eldest daughter of the Hon. David Murray and grandniece of the sixth Baron Elibank. During her childhood her father's naval career took the family abroad for substantial periods. In the 1820s the Shirreff family lived in France, first at St Germain-en-Laye, near Paris, and then in Normandy. From 1830 to 1834 they lived in Gibraltar, where William Shirreff was captain of the port. Along with her sisters, Caroline ('b'. 1812), Maria ('b'. 1816), and Katherine ('b'. 1818), she was educated by a Swiss-French governess, Adele Piquet. Both brothers died young, William in 1829 and Henry in 1833. Emily remained unmarried, the only one of the sisters to do so. An early portrait of Emily and her sisters in adolescence depicts the group as fashionably attractive and appropriately feminine. 
The family's circle of friends included prominent intellectuals, women and men, and Emily Shirreff grew up in the company of some of the best-known nineteenth-century scientists -- Mary Somerville, Charles Lyell, William Whewell, and John Herschel -- as well as among leading literary figures. Never healthy herself, and battling frequent bouts of neuralgia after an early encounter with infantile fever, she none the less spent her younger adult years nursing various family members through sickness. She was close to her younger sister, Maria Georgina Grey, with whom she collaborated both on numerous writing projects and on the feminist educational campaigns which would secure her name for posterity. When her sister's husband, William Thomas Grey, died in March 1864, the joint career upon which the two sisters had already embarked blossomed into increasing prominence. 
As young women, the Shirreff sisters had enjoyed considerable publishing success, first in 1835 with their 'Letters from Spain and Barbary', then in 1841 with a novel, 'Passion and Principle' (reissued in 1854 as part of 'Routledge's Railway Library'). In 1850 Maria Grey's husband financed the publication of their first major work, 'Thoughts on Self-Culture Addressed to Women', a work which heralded the interest of the sisters in furthering the educational opportunities available for women of their class. 'Thoughts on Self-Culture' espoused an intellectual independence for women firmly based on notions of reason and Christian humanism. Their belief in the perfection of the mind and the importance of developing the intellect clearly foreshadows their active commitment to the principles of women's education. 'Intellectual Education and its Influence on the Character and Happiness of Women', Shirreff's first major single-authored work, appeared in 1858, and further developed the principles of this earlier discussion. It was in the 1870s, after their responsibilities as family nurses declined, that Shirreff and her sister turned their attention more fully to the far-reaching and highly successful campaigns they were to spearhead. 
Emily Shirreff was actively involved in fund-raising for the North London Collegiate School and its planned sister school, the Camden School, both founded by Frances Buss. She publicly supported the medical education of women, and played a key role in developing both secondary and tertiary educational openings for women. She was mistress of the newly founded Hitchin (later Girton) College for women during the Lent term of 1870 (writing an account of the college in the 'Fortnightly Review', 1873), and in 1871 launched, with her sister, the National Union for the Improvement of the Education of Women of all Classes. Widely known as the Women's Education Union, and inaugurated in November 1871 at the Royal Society of Arts with Lord Lyttelton presiding, the union's aim was to provide secondary schools for girls and to raise the status of teaching as a profession, especially for women. To these ends, the union helped to found a number of academically rigorous girls' schools and worked to improve and formalize teacher training opportunities for women. 
Under the aegis of the union, Shirreff and her sister launched the Girls' Public Day School Company (GPDSC) in June 1872. The company offered $5 shares as a way of raising money to finance the opening of new non-denominational girls' schools. Shareholders received dividends on the profit made from tuition fees, which ranged from 2 to 8 guineas termly; by 1883, with twenty-six schools in operation, shareholders were paid an annual 5 per cent on their investment. The money raised in shares was used for renting, purchasing, or building premises for the schools and for furnishing them. The daughters of shareholders were given priority as entrants, provided they met the entrance requirements. The first of the GPDSC schools opened in London, at Norland Square, Chelsea, in January 1873, with twenty pupils. The school's initial mission was to prepare the girls for the local examinations administered by Oxford and Cambridge as well as those of the College of Preceptors. The schools were deeply influenced by the educational philosophy which Shirreff shared with her sister Maria; both were company vice-presidents. Their view of education stressed both intellectual and physical accomplishment, and saw pleasure as well as discipline as key elements in a successful education. As a result, the schools founded under their influence encouraged girls in physical education, in an appreciation of nature, and in music, as well as in more traditional aspects of the nineteenth-century curriculum. Shirreff, like her sister, was a liberal educationist whose views were grounded in a humanitarian Christianity. Her lecture published in 1875 as 'The Enjoyment of Life' outlines these principles. The success of the company schools was such that the Church Schools Company, which was founded in 1883, deliberately emulated the policies pursued by the GPDSC. By 1879 the GPDSC itself boasted seventeen schools enrolling 2804 students. 
Shirreff was both the honorary secretary of the Women's Education Union and co-editor of its house journal, the 'Journal of the Women's Education Union'. The first of the nine volumes of the journal appeared in January 1873, edited by Shirreff and George C. T. Bartley, author of 'Schools for the People'. The journal was a considerable drain on the union's resources, and by 1878 had been reduced to little more than a broadsheet of four pages. Shirreff frequently contributed articles to the journal. Shirreff was also involved in the union's foundation of an evening college for women, which opened at 1 Queen Street, Brompton, in London, in 1878, and in the Governess Registry which it sponsored in 1880. She was also present at the founding meeting (1887) of the Parents' Educational Union, of which she was a vice-president. 
Emily Shirreff was an avid supporter of the education principles of Friedrich Froebel, and one of the founders of the Froebel Society. She was the first secretary of the society from 1874 to 1876, when she was elected its president, a position she held until the end of her life. Many of her later writings reflect her interests in this area. In 1876 she published 'The kindergarten: principles of Froebel's system; also remarks on the higher education of women' (2nd edn, 1880). The following year she contributed a sketch of her mentor's life to Berta Maria, Baroness Marenholtz-Bulow's 'Reminiscences of Friedrich Froebel'. Many of the talks she gave on Froebel's system at the Royal Society of Arts, the Froebel Society, and the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science over the years were published as pamphlets. She also contributed a monthly column to 'The Governess', 'The kinder-garten at home'. 'Moral Training: Froebel and Herbert Spencer' appeared in 1892. 
Emily Shirreff's writings were not, however, confined to the topic of education. In 1864 her pamphlet 'The Chivalry of the South', published by the Ladies' London Emancipation Society at the time of the American Civil War, was a fierce denunciation of the continued existence of slavery in the American south. In politics she was a Liberal who strongly supported women's suffrage. But unlike her sister, whose sympathies were increasingly democratic, she was opposed to further extensions of the franchise after the 1867 'Reform Act'; Shirreff's Liberalism was of an older vintage and she did not seek to extend the franchise vertically to the unpropertied, merely horizontally to suitably qualified women. Her works 'Wasted Forces' (1880) and 'The Work of the World and Women's Share in It' (1881) both enunciated her feminist principles. She declined an invitation to stand as a Liberal candidate for the new London school board in 1870. In 1874 she joined the Women's Peace and Arbitration Auxiliary, which later changed its name to the London Peace Society. 
In 1872 Emily Shirreff contributed a biographical sketch of Henry Thomas Buckle to the posthumous edition of his works which Helen Taylor was overseeing. Shirreff had been close to Buckle as a young woman and profoundly influenced by him intellectually. There is evidence that he had made a proposal of marriage to her, but that she had, on finding that his moral practices did not match her own principles, declined. After the death of her sister's husband in 1864 Shirreff and Maria Grey lived and travelled together, dividing their time between Italy and London. They lived first at Cadogan Place, and later at 41 Stanhope Gardens, Queen's Gate, London. It was here that Emily Shirreff died on 20 March 1897. She was buried in Brompton cemetery four days later. 
While politically more conservative than her sister and partner, Emily Shirreff was a formidable force in the cause of women's education, where her campaigning skills and breadth of interest touched upon a wide range of educational issues. She was a principled campaigner, a prolific and impassioned author, and a woman of deep Christian convictions. It was, thus, with women's moral and spiritual contributions and talents that she was most concerned. 


@@@@@


doc= 25445


Shirreff, John (1759-1818), agricultural writer, was born at Captainhead, Haddington, the son of Matthew Shiraff (died 'c'.1785), a Haddingtonshire tenant farmer, and Jean Maitland, probably his wife. Very little is known about his early life, wife, or children, though he was said to have received a liberal education. As a young man he was for a number of years a merchant in the West Indies with his brother-in-law, Mr Burton. Following the death of his father he returned home to take on the tenancy of the family farm and to develop a number of agricultural innovations. In 1793, in conjunction with Robert Brown and George Rennie, he was appointed by the board of agriculture to undertake the survey of the West Riding of Yorkshire. Their impressive report, of which Brown was the main author, was widely praised by William Marshall, who had been critical of the accounts of other counties. On his return from Yorkshire, Shirreff attempted to popularize a number of agricultural innovations including a wind driven threshing machine and to encourage the use of bonemeal as an agricultural fertilizer. His success in persuading other farmers to adopt these methods was very limited. 
In 1801 Shirreff obtained an award from the board of agriculture for an essay on the most appropriate ways of cropping and reseeding pasture fields. He also compiled an account for the London Society of Arts on the osier plantations on his farm. The death of his eldest two sons in their early twenties devastated him. He sublet the farm, moved initially to Craigside, Abbeyhill, and later to other residences in the Edinburgh region. He made a precarious living from writing articles and reports (on various scientific subjects and the rural economy) which were published primarily in the 'Farmers' Magazine' and 'Scots Monthly Magazine'. These included 'Discussions on turnips, potatoes and apple trees', 'Curled disease in potatoes', 'Introduction of exotic heaths', and 'Method of stacking turnips to preserve them through the winter'. His main achievement was to undertake, for the board of agriculture, separate surveys of the Orkney and Shetland islands, which included detailed suggestions for improving their subsistence farming methods. 
Shirreff was a recognized authority on agriculture and botany, and was widely consulted by agriculturists. His knowledge of Poa, Festuca, and Tritica and the smaller grasses was described in his obituary in the 'Farmers' Magazine' as perhaps superior to that of any other man in existence. His countenance and figure were denoted as being exceedingly manly and graceful, with highly prepossessing manners and address. According to his obituary he was rather outspoken, which meant that in spite of all his advantage 'he was ill-calculated to secure the patronage of the great' ('Farmers' Magazine', 207-9). During the last years of his life he lived in the countryside, taking responsibility for the management of several estates. Following a prolonged illness, during which he was looked after by his wife, his children, and his brother, Alexander Shirreff, he died on 2 November 1818 and was interred at the burial-ground of his ancestors at Prestonkirk, Haddingtonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 25446


Shirreffs, Andrew (bap. 1762, d. 1807?), poet, was baptized in Aberdeen on 9 February 1762, the son of David Shirreffs, carpenter, and his wife, Ann Lunan. Two of his brothers attained some distinction in Aberdeen. James was minister of St Nicholas's Church from 1778 to 1814, and Alexander was sheriff-clerk-depute and latterly president of the Society of Advocates. Andrew Shirreffs was educated at the grammar school, entered Marischal College in 1779, and graduated MA in 1783. He lost both legs and consequently abandoned the intention of following a learned profession, and began business in Aberdeen as a bookseller and bookbinder. 
Shirreffs corresponded with John Skinner and James Beattie. Burns in the notes of his northern tour mentions having seen him, and describes him as 'a little decrepid body with some abilities'. He was best-known as the author of 'Jamie and Bess', a pastoral five-act comedy, written avowedly in imitation of Ramsay's 'Gentle Shepherd'. It was performed in Aberdeen in 1787, and in Edinburgh, for the author's benefit, in 1796, where he appeared and sang his own song, 'A Cogie o'yill and a pickle Aitmeal'. In May 1787 he joined with others in starting the short-lived 'Aberdeen Chronicle' (not to be confused with the paper of the same name started in 1806), and became proprietor and joint editor of the 'Caledonian Magazine'. The latter ceased in 1790, and he went to Edinburgh as a bookseller and printer. Inglis mentions a short piece, 'The Sons of Britannia', said to have been acted in Edinburgh in 1796, but it does not seem to have been printed. In 1790 Shirreffs published in Edinburgh 'Poems, Chiefly in the Scottish Dialect'. 
In 1798 Shirreffs left for London, after which it is impossible to trace him. The date of his death is given as 1807, but this cannot be confirmed; and from his not appearing with his brothers in the will of his first cousin Alexander, a Jamaica planter, who died in 1801, it might be inferred that he was dead before that date. His dramatic and poetic works were reprinted in 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 25447


Shirwood, John (d. 1493), bishop of Durham, was the son of John Shirwood of York, the city's common clerk, and Agnes, his wife. He was educated at both Cambridge and Oxford, for as MA and BTh of the former he supplicated for DTh at the latter in 1456. By this time he had already been admitted to his first living, that of Terrington in his native Yorkshire. He owed his further advancement to the patronage of George Neville, who at the age of twenty-five was consecrated bishop of Exeter in 1458, and for whom Shirwood acted as Latin secretary. He became chancellor of Exeter Cathedral in 1460 and followed Neville to York in 1465, being collated archdeacon of Richmond on 5 July 1465 and receiving the 'golden prebend' of Masham on 5 August 1471; these two livings alone provided him with an income of some $350 p.a. Pardoned by Edward IV in 1471 for his acquiescence in Henry VI's readeption, he became a king's chaplain and within three years had taken up residence in Rome. In 1476 he became an apostolic protonotary, and in the following year was made the king's proctor at the curia, which he remained until Edward IV's death in 1483. 
Shirwood is sometimes said to have returned to England in time to participate in Richard III's coronation, but this seems to be based on a confusion with Bishop William Dudley of Durham whom he was shortly to succeed. The evidence implies that he was continuously in Rome, and he was certainly there as Richard's representative early in 1484. Elected on 30 January and provided by 29 March 1484, he was consecrated at Rome on 26 May as bishop of Durham. Richard III also recommended to Sixtus IV that he be made a cardinal. He was almost certainly engaged, unsuccessfully, in pressing Sixtus's successor Innocent VIII not to sanction Henry Tudor's cause, being advocated early in 1485 by his fellow bishop, John Morton (then in exile). He remained in Rome after Richard III's overthrow, being willing to serve his new king, Henry VII, as proctor from February 1486. He probably returned to England thereafter, but was almost immediately sent back to Rome, as one of the king's envoys to tender his obedience, and arrived there on 8 May 1487. He had not as yet visited his diocese, the temporalities of which had been restored to him only on 16 August 1485, very shortly before Bosworth. A series of undated letters to him from John Auckland, prior of Durham, the last probably written on 1 February 1488, anticipated his arrival in the north-east. But he probably did not set foot in the palatinate until towards the end of 1489, his first recorded action being the appointment of Alexander Lee as his chancellor on 12 January 1490. He stayed in his diocese for little more than two years, before he was once more appointed the king's proctor and orator at the curia. He was in London in February 1492; and arrived in Rome on 14 June. He died, after a short illness, on 14 January 1493 and was buried in the English hospice, of which he had been a member since 1475, chamberlain from 1476 to 1483, and where he had lived in some style from 1480 to 1486. 
Shirwood's greatest fame lies in his being one of the earliest English humanists. His library, which he left at Bishop Auckland in 1492, and which was donated by his successor Bishop Richard Fox to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, was collected by him in England and Rome between 1461 and 1487. It contained over three dozen, mainly printed, works, predominantly of classical Roman authors, but also including some moderns. But more significantly he was one of the first Englishmen to learn Greek, possibly being taught first by Manuel of Constantinople, who dedicated a Greek text to George Neville in 1468, then by George Hermonymos in the early 1470s, and perfecting the language later in Rome. He reputedly owned Greek manuscripts which remained in store at Bishop Auckland and disappeared during the Reformation. His support for Greek exiles in England is well documented, extending to exhortation in 1471 to the no doubt bemused inhabitants of Richmondshire to contribute to a collection on behalf of Demetrius Rosato. Shirwood's only surviving writing, which reveals his polished Latin style, is a treatise on the game of 'Arithmomachia', a sophisticated variant of chess, which, so he states in his preface, he taught Archbishop Neville in 1475 during a visit to Calais. 
Before his career under Neville took flight Shirwood was attracted to the Carthusian order, which he considered joining in 1458 -- a leaning which suggests an outlook akin to that of later Christian humanists like John Colet and Sir Thomas More. His attention to his ecclesiastical duties in England was slight. He was for most of his career an absentee from Richmondshire and Durham; his monition to the clergy of Richmondshire in January 1471 against non-residence might perhaps cause modern eyebrows to rise. He left little mark on his diocese. He served three kings loyally as proctor in Rome, which probably says less about the fickleness of his political allegiance, and more about the solidarity and corporate spirit of the episcopate of his day, and an emerging sense of duty to the crown of England as distinct from the individual wearing it. Perhaps his other masters would have concurred with Richard III's recommendation of him to Sixtus IV in 1484 as one 'whose integrity of life, exceptional gentle manners together with the unparalleled virtue with which he is endowed, draw and attract our love to him' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 12.214). 


@@@@@


doc= 25448


Shirwood, Robert (fl. 1519-1523), Hebraist, was born in Coventry and educated at Oxford University, where 'he made considerable progress in logicals, but more by far in the Hebrew and Greek languages' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.58). But who could have taught him Hebrew in early sixteenth-century Oxford remains a mystery. To further his knowledge of oriental languages, Shirwood travelled abroad and eventually settled in Louvain, attracted by the presence of the eminent English Hebraist Robert Wakefield at the Collegium Trilingue. By December 1519 he was considered a linguist of sufficient calibre to replace Wakefield as professor of Hebrew. But he resigned after only one month and eventually returned to England. He spent the rest of his life as rector of Dyrham, Gloucestershire. 
Shirwood's significance in the history of scholarship rests not only on the fact that he was one of the first Hebrew scholars in Tudor England, but also on his use of rabbinic commentators to elucidate the text of scripture. Though he is credited with making a Latin translation of the Hebrew 'Bible', his only extant work (apart from a few sermons) is a Latin version of 'Ecclesiastes', published together with a commentary at Antwerp in 1523. In the preface Shirwood emphasizes that his translation is not a paraphrase but a verbatim rendering of the Hebrew, which students should find helpful because of its literalness and accuracy compared to the 'Vulgate'. Difficult words and phrases are explained by using the 'Targum' and the comments of medieval rabbis. His intention is not to censure the 'Vulgate', but to rectify errors and omissions and make the meaning of the text that much plainer. He is also anxious to rescue 'Ecclesiastes' from the obscurity into which it had apparently fallen, and to encourage others to study it. A mark of the esteem in which Shirwood's version was held is that the Jesuit scholar Juan de Pineda included it alongside those of Jerome, the 'Septuagint', and the 'Targum' in his 1620 polyglot edition of 'Ecclesiastes' on the grounds that it was true to the Hebrew original. 
The notes provided for the guidance of the reader reveal a competent Hebraist familiar with the rabbis. Almost a decade before Pagninus and Sebastian Muenster demonstrated the value of rabbinic commentaries for a better understanding of the Hebrew 'Bible', Shirwood had recognized the relevance of the Jewish exegetical tradition for Christians. He was one of the earliest English scholars to appreciate post-biblical Jewish writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 25449


Sherwood, William of (d. in or before 1272), logician and ecclesiastic, was presumably born in Nottinghamshire. The details of his early career are not known, though it is likely that he studied at Oxford, and he most probably wrote his logical treatises in the late 1230s and 1240s. Some authorities claim that he taught at the University of Paris, but there is no positive evidence for this. He was certainly a master by 27 January 1249, when 'magister Willielmus de Shirwood' was one of the witnesses to the foundation deed of the nunnery of Marham in Norfolk; and he was equally certainly at Oxford in 1252, when 'Magister Wilhelmus de Skirwodde' was one of the northerners who swore to the terms of peace agreed by the northern and Irish scholars (who had recently been involved in violent conflict) at Oxford. He became treasurer of Lincoln no earlier than December 1254, after the death of Peter Chaceporc; and the first surviving document mentioning him as treasurer is dated between December 1254 and November 1258. In 1258 he was granted a papal dispensation to hold a benefice with cure of souls in addition to his post as treasurer; and he was still treasurer in 1263, when he played a prominent role in the settlement of a dispute between the cathedral and the city of Lincoln. A document dated October 1266 refers to him as rector of the prebendal church of Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, but he ceased to be rector before November 1267. His name also appears in the list of rectors of Attleborough in Norfolk under Henry III, and a reference there to the man who became rector at his death suggests that Sherwood must have died by 1272. If it is assumed that he remained treasurer of Lincoln until his death, this conjecture is supported by the fact that Richard of Battle became treasurer some time between 1269 and 1272. 
The most important source of Sherwood's works is a Paris manuscript (Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 16617), whose first part contains several works written in an English hand. The first item is an 'Introductiones in logicam' which is explicitly attributed to Sherwood (ibid., fols. 1-23'r'), one of several general outlines of logic that survive from the thirteenth century. These include the well-known 'Tractatus' (or 'Summulae logicales') of Petrus Hispanus, and the slightly later 'Summulae dialectices' of Roger Bacon. Like Petrus Hispanus, Sherwood covers both the basic topics of Aristotle's logic with the exception of the 'Posterior Analytics', and the newly developed logic of terms or supposition theory. There is no evidence that either man knew the other's work, and similarities derive from the fact that they drew on the same tradition. A tract on supposition theory is found in whole or in part in two other manuscripts (Venice, Biblioteca Nazionale Marciana, MS Z.L.302, fols. 161'r'-162'v'; Worcester Cathedral, MS Q.13, fols. 58'r'b-59'v'b), and its use in teaching is attested by the existence of anonymous 'Dubitationes' (Worcester Cathedral, MS Q.13, fols. 59'v'b-63'v') dating from the 1290s. The 'Introductiones' are followed by a work on 'Syncategoremata' (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 16617, fols. 23'r'-46'r') -- that is, special logical terms, such as 'whole', 'only', 'necessarily'. This too is explicitly attributed to Sherwood, as it is in the only other manuscript copy (Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 55, fols. 205'r'a-224'r'b). Next there are two treatises on 'insolubilia', or semantic paradoxes (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 16617, fols. 46'v'-50'v' and 50'v'-54'v') of which the first has been tentatively assigned to Sherwood by its editor, though there is no firm evidence. Finally there is a treatise on 'obligationes', or the rules governing what one is obliged to accept or reject in a certain kind of logical disputation (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 16617, fols. 54'v'-62'v'), followed by a treatise called 'Petitiones contrariorum', on solutions to sophismata, or logical puzzle-cases (ibid., fols. 62'v'-64'v'). There is no particular reason to think that the last work is by Sherwood, but the 'De obligationibus', which exists in three other manuscripts (Erfurt, Wissenschaftliche Allgemeine Bibliothek, Amploniana MS Q 259, fols. 209'r'-214'v'; Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 16130, fols. 110'v'-114'r'; Venice, Biblioteca Nazionale Marciana, MS Z.L.302 (X 204), fols. 151'r'a-155'v'a), has caused some controversy. The Paris manuscript attributes it to Magister W, but two other manuscripts attribute it to Walter Burley, and the Venice manuscript attributes it to Burley in the heading and to Sherwood in the 'explicit'. There seems no way to settle the issue of authorship at this point. Three theological works were attributed to Sherwood by Leland in the sixteenth century, but even if they were by Sherwood, they have not survived. 
Evidence of Sherwood's importance is provided by Roger Bacon. In his 'Opus tertium' of 1267 Bacon wrote that Sherwood was 'much wiser than Albert [the Great]; for in 'philosophia communis' no one is greater than he' ('Rogeri Bacon opera', 14); and in his 'Compendium studii philosophiae' of 1271 Bacon linked Sherwood with Robert Grosseteste (died 1253) and other wise men of the recent past. 


@@@@@


doc= 25450


Shoberl, Frederic (1775-1853), journalist and writer, was born in London on 10 April 1775, the son of Frederick Schoeberl and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Hill, and was baptized at St Katherine Coleman in the City of London on 30 April 1775. He was of German descent, and educated at the Moravian school at Fulneck, near Leeds. He settled in London, where he married at St James, Clerkenwell, on 24 July 1799, Seedo (Theodosia), 'nee' Vaughan, with whom he had two sons, William and Frederic. Shoberl became, with Henry Colburn, the originator and co-proprietor of the 'New Monthly Magazine', which began in February 1814. For some time he acted as its editor, and contributed original articles and reviews. He was long associated with Rudolph Ackermann, whose 'Repository of Arts' he edited from March 1809 to December 1828. He conducted Ackermann's English annual, 'The Forget-me-Not', from 1822 until 1834, and also edited the 'Juvenile Forget-me-Not' from 1828 to 1832. In addition to his work for Ackermann, Shoberl was printer and publisher of the 'Cornwall Gazette, Falmouth Packet, and Plymouth Journal' (1818-19), a Conservative paper issued at Truro. 
As well as his journalistic writing, Shoberl produced numerous other works reflecting his varied interests. In 1814 he published 'A History of the University of Oxford', followed by 'A History of the University of Cambridge' in 1815 and 'An Historical Account of the House of Saxony' in 1816. He had already published a variety of travel literature: 'Travellers in Switzerland' (1803), 'Travels in Greece, Palestine, Egypt and Barbary' (translated from a French original, 1812), and 'Travels in Caucasus and Georgia' (translated from a German original, 1814). Later he became involved in producing a large number of translations from, among others, Klopstock, Kotzebue, Alfred de Vigny, Thiers, and Chateaubriand. He was also involved in the continuation, with J. Nightingale and others, of Brayley and Britton's 'Beauties of England and Wales', having compiled volume 14 containing Suffolk, Surrey, and Sussex in 1813. With J. Watkins he compiled 'A Biographical Dictionary of Living Authors' (1816). 
Shoberl died at Thistle Grove, Brompton, London, on 5 March 1853, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 12 March. His wife had predeceased him on 18 December 1838, as had his younger son, Frederic, who had been printer to Prince Albert at 51 Rupert Street and had died on 22 March 1852, aged forty-eight. Shoberl was survived by his elder son, William Shoberl (1801-1863), who was first an assistant to the publisher H. Colburn, and then a publisher in his own right at 20 Great Marlborough Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25451


Shore, Elizabeth (d. 1526/7?), royal mistress, was the daughter of John Lambert (died 1487), citizen and mercer of London, and Amy (died 1488), daughter of Robert Marshall, citizen and grocer of London. She married William Shore (died 1494), a London mercer, but the marriage was annulled in 1476, at her petition, on the grounds of his impotence. The main source for her relationship with Edward IV is Thomas More, who is responsible (in his 'History of Richard III') for the story that Edward claimed to have three concubines: the merriest, the wiliest, and the holiest harlot in his realm. 'Shore's wife' (the name Jane was attached to her by the dramatist Thomas Heywood in 1599) was the merriest; in More's words: 'a proper wit had she, & could both rede wel & write, mery in company, redy & quick of aunswer, neither mute nor ful of bable, sometime taunting without displesure & not without disport'. More continued with a famous tribute: 'For many he had, but her he loved, whose favour to saithe trouth... she never abused to any mans hurt, but to many a mans comfort.... And finally in many weighty sutes, she stode many men in gret stede, either for none, or very smal rewardes, & those rather gay then rich: either for that she was content with the dede selfe well done, or for that she delited to be suid unto, & to show what she was able to do wyth the king... (More, 56)' Perhaps predictably, no source from Edward's reign names Elizabeth Shore as a royal mistress, but she does enter the historical record in the next reign. The king's death on 9 April 1483 apparently left her in need of a new protector, and a contemporary reference casts Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset in that role. In October 1483, when he was in rebellion against Richard III, he was accused of holding 'the unshameful and mischievous woman called Shore's wife in adultery' ('CPR', '1476-85', 371). The great chronicle of London and Thomas More, by contrast, link her instead with Edward's friend and chamberlain William, Lord Hastings. According to the 'Great Chronicle', she was called to answer for some of Hastings's goods after his death in June 1483 and her own goods were attached by the sheriffs of London. She was also put to public penance 'for the lyfe that she ledd with the said lord hastyngys and othir grete astatys' (Thomas and Thornley, 233). More's account of that penance is another famous set piece: 'In which she went in countenance & pace demure so womanly, & albeit she were out of al array save her kyrtle only: yet went she so fair & lovely... that her great shame wan her much praise' (More, 54-5). 
The claimed association of Elizabeth Shore with Hastings led some later historians to argue that she was an intermediary in a Woodville-Hastings plot against Richard, duke of Gloucester, in June 1483. There is no contemporary support for the claim, and More himself, the source for the story, explicitly dismisses it as an implausible fiction put about by Gloucester. Elizabeth was, however, in political trouble of some sort after Edward's death, and was imprisoned in Ludgate at the commandment of Richard III, as Gloucester became. This is made clear by an undated letter from Richard to the bishop of Lincoln, announcing that the king's solicitor, Thomas Lynom, had contracted matrimony with her, being 'merveillously blynded and abused' (Horrox and Hammond, 3.259). The king hoped that the bishop might be able to talk him out of his infatuation but, failing that, Elizabeth was to be released from gaol if she could find sureties for her good behaviour and given into her father's keeping until the king's return to London. Lynom evidently remained unmoved by episcopal argument, for the will of Elizabeth's father, made in September 1487, makes it clear that the two had married. Elizabeth was bequeathed a bed of arras and (rather pointedly, perhaps) a painted cloth of Mary Magdalen and Martha. Lynom managed to transfer his services to the Tudors and was active on the Welsh border under Henry VII and in the early years of Henry VIII. He was a councillor of Prince Arthur and controller of the rolls of his household. 
Lynom was dead by 29 July 1518, and this perhaps provides the context for More's description of Elizabeth fallen into penury in her old age. But More's claim that she had to resort to begging seems overdrawn, particularly if the Thomas Lynom who was active in Wales after 1518 was her son. No definite identification of her children can, however, be made. Her father's will mentions a Julian Lynom, bequeathed 40's'., who was perhaps the first child of the marriage, but he cannot be traced. It is not known exactly when Elizabeth died. More writes of her as still alive, though very old, when he was composing his 'History of Richard III' in the second decade of the sixteenth century; a variant text of the 'History' states that she died in the eighteenth year of Henry VIII (1526/1527). Though not implausible, the date cannot be proved. As Jane Shore she enjoyed a considerable literary afterlife, as the subject of poems, ballads, and plays; the most notable of the latter was Nicholas Rowe's 'Tragedy of Jane Shore', first produced in 1714. She also appears in a number of historical novels. 


@@@@@


doc= 25452


Shore, John, first Baron Teignmouth (1751-1834), governor-general of Bengal and founder and first president of the British and Foreign Bible Society, was born on 8 October 1751 at St James Street, Piccadilly, where the family were living temporarily, and was baptized in St James's Church on 23 October. He was the elder of the two children of Thomas Shore (died 'c'.1759), a supercargo in the East India Company trading to China, and his second wife, Dorothy (died 1783), daughter of Captain Shepherd of the company's naval service. The family lived in Melton Place, near Romford in Essex, where John Shore attended school until he was seven, when he was sent to a school in Tottenham. At fifteen he went to Harrow School, where he developed a taste for the Latin and Greek classics which remained with him throughout his life. Nominated for a writership in Bengal by Frederick Pigou, a family friend who was a proprietor of the East India Company, he left Harrow for a commercial school at Hoxton to study bookkeeping and accounts, the formal requirement for appointment as a writer in the company's civil service. 
Shore sailed for Bengal late in 1768, arriving in May 1769. Appointed as a writer to the secret political department, in 1770 he was sent as assistant to the controlling council of revenue at Murshidabad, one of the two divisions for the collection of the revenue of the company's Bengal territories. Shore became, 'de facto', the company's chief agent in the vast district because his superiors were busy elsewhere on their own business or, as he reported to his mother, were indolent and indifferent to their responsibilities (Shore, 'Memoir of... Teignmouth', 1.28). During Shore's first year in Murshidabad, as the revenue system was breaking down under years of mismanagement and corruption by the company's and the nawab's local officials, an appalling famine, one of the worst in Indian history, devastated the area. The company's officials in the area were charged, in both India and England, with manipulating the food supply for their own profit, and Shore himself was accused of corruption, but after an investigation his name was cleared. 
Shore's opportunity to show his ability came in 1772 with the changes instituted by Warren Hastings, the governor-general of Bengal. The directors in London had decided that the company should no longer try to manage the revenues through Indian intermediaries, but should take direct control, and Shore was posted to Rajshahi, one of the most important districts, as assistant to Samuel Middleton. He also had the temporary post as Persian translator at the nawab's court in Murshidabad. Although at first he had no grammars or dictionaries, he managed through oral instruction from local teachers to study Arabic, Persian, Hindustani, and Bengali, becoming one of the first of the company's servants to achieve reasonable literacy in Indian languages. He maintained his proficiency in Persian throughout his life. 
Shore's growing reputation led to his appointment by Hastings in 1775 as one of five members to the provincial revenue council at Calcutta. This was the period of the great quarrels between Hastings and his leading councillor, Philip Francis, but, although Shore was known to share many of Francis's views, Hastings recognized his ability, and in 1780, when the revenue council was replaced by the committee of revenue, he was appointed to it, serving on it until he left India in 1785, and becoming its acting head. In addition, he was sent by Hastings to make revenue settlements in the districts of Patna and Dacca. In 1785 he summed up the committee's work, and indeed his view of the company's administration in general, when he wrote that the members were vested with vast power, but to pretend that they were able to carry out their duties responsibly would be 'folly and falsehood' (Shore, 'Memoir of... Teignmouth', 1.73). 
While an immense official correspondence bears witness to Shore's energy, hard work, and mastery of the intricacies of the Bengal revenue system, surviving letters to his mother and other friends in England give little indication of his private life. The company servants were still making fortunes through private trade, commissions on the revenue collections, and gifts from the nawab and his officials, but, as Shore complained to his mother, 'the road to opulence grows daily narrower, and is more crowded with competitors', restricted by stricter supervision in London. By 1781 he had acquired enough, however, through savings from his salary, trade, and investments, to offer his mother $1000 a year, which she did not accept, and he spoke of his 'handsome emoluments' from his position in the revenue departments as 'avowed, authorised, and liberal' (Shore, 'Memoir of... Teignmouth', 1.79-84). 
Of the friends Shore made in Bengal, two were of particular importance to him. One was Sir William Jones, the great scholar who came out as judge of the supreme court. On Jones's death Shore succeeded him as president of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and he later edited a collection of Jones's letters ('Memoirs of... William Jones'). The other was Charles Grant, who later became a dominant figure in the East India Company and the leading advocate for the evangelization of India, but at this time he was seeking spiritual advice from Shore, which led to his acceptance of Shore's evangelical Christianity. Shore's own religious attitude is summed up in a comment he made about his mother's religion as being, after the fashion of the time, a 'dwelling principally on the morality of the Gospel, and little on the fundamental doctrine of the Atonement' (Shore, 'Memoir of... Teignmouth', 1.6). His private correspondence throughout his life would be permeated by his anxiety about sin and the need for salvation. He disliked India, partly because he was ill much of the time, perhaps from malaria, and he suffered so much from insomnia that he once said he had never slept more than two hours a night in India (ibid., 1.112). But he also disliked its customs and especially its religion, while being critical of what he regarded as the licentious behaviour of many of the company's servants in his time. Light is perhaps cast on his personal sense of sin, especially sins of the flesh, by the comment that in his early years in Bengal he did not resist bad examples and 'lived as other young men did' (ibid., 1.26). Shore apparently had a mistress, presumably an Indian woman, for the records list the baptism of three illegitimate children of John Shore. John was baptized in October 1777, and Francis and Martha on 2 February 1785, but the mother's name is not given (BL OIOC, N/1/2, fol. 285, and N/1/4, fol. 11). A letter in December 1783 from one of his friends in Bengal, G. G. Ducarel, to another, David Anderson, confirms this, noting that Shore had held positions in Bengal which 'a person with a less delicate Sense of Honour' would have used to make a fortune, but as he thought of returning to England he had less than $7000, and he had to provide for 'two natural Children at present in being and one more in expectation' (BL, Add. MS 45435, fol. 264). That these children are not mentioned by Shore's detractors, especially those who disliked his piety, suggests how commonplace this aspect of his behaviour was among the company's servants. He left Bengal in 1785, on the same ship as Warren Hastings, who impressed him with his friendliness and scholarly interests. 
Shore arrived in England in June and spent the first few months visiting friends. In November he met Charlotte Cornish (died 1834) of Teignmouth, described as 'a young lady of great personal attractions', and they were married on 14 February 1786 (Shore, 'Memoir of... Teignmouth', 1.117). The marriage appears to have been happy, despite their long separations when either his wife did not accompany him to India or had to return home because of illness. They eventually had nine children, two of whom died in infancy. 
Shore thought in 1786 that he was through with India, but within two weeks he was asked to go back as a member of the supreme council of the new governor-general, Lord Cornwallis. Shore's appointment came from the dominant group within the company, who recognized that his experience and knowledge of the revenue system, and his reputation for integrity, would serve its interests, especially as Cornwallis had no knowledge of the subcontinent. Shore accepted the appointment, despite his dislike of India, as his marriage meant he needed more money. He sailed in April 1786, leaving his new wife behind. 
As a member of the supreme council, Shore did not have specific duties, but Cornwallis relied on him in making the administrative and judicial changes that transformed the government of Bengal, especially in relation to the collection of revenue. While it is difficult to summarize Shore's intricate writings, especially as he was always arguing against other interpretations of the available data and changing his views as he gained new information, he asserted that the historical evidence showed that throughout Mughal times the 'zamindars' were not just tax collectors, but had been the hereditary proprietors of the soil. Giving the company maximum revenue while providing stability for agriculture could only be done, he insisted, through standardized assessments with the 'zamindars' as the acknowledged owners of the land. While he agreed that the fairest system would be to make a settlement directly with the peasants, he felt that the company had neither the knowledge nor the personnel to institute such a drastic change from the system they had found. A ten-year settlement, he was convinced, would give the 'zamindars' an assurance of stability, and the government could get a clearer understanding of how the system worked. Against Shore's advocacy of a decennial settlement were those like the influential Thomas Law and James Grant who argued for a permanent settlement, which meant not only recognizing the 'zamindars' as landlords, but guaranteeing that the revenue payment fixed at the beginning would be perpetual. Shore argued that not enough was known about the actual state of the economy to justify the British making a permanent revenue commitment that would prevent them from profiting from any increase in agricultural productivity. While acknowledging that Shore's knowledge of the Indian revenue systems was unmatched and that his reasoning on most points was persuasive, Cornwallis decided that a permanent settlement would best serve the needs of the British while making their subjects in Bengal 'the happiest people in India' ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 1.460-74, minute, 19 Feb 1790). Shore always remained doubtful about the wisdom of the decision. 
Shore left Bengal at the end of 1789, arriving back in England in April 1790 to be greeted by his wife and their first child, a daughter, Charlotte, whom he had not seen before. He estimated his income at this time at $900 a year, from savings from his salary of $10,000 a year while on the supreme council, and he once more expected to retire to reading the classics in Devonshire. In 1790 he gave evidence in Hastings's favour during his impeachment, insisting, based on his knowledge of the period, that Hastings was never personally corrupt, while, he wrote privately, of the two main accusers, Edmund Burke was mad and Philip Francis, once his friend, was 'malicious and revengeful' (Shore, 'Memoir of... Teignmouth', 1.206). Then, to his surprise, he was asked to go back to India as governor-general, as Henry Dundas, the president of the Board of Control, the government's agency for influencing the East India Company, and Shore's friends among the directors of the company saw him as the best hope for continuing the reforms begun by Cornwallis. Shore, having been created a baronet, sailed for India on 26 October 1792, arriving in Calcutta in March 1793. 
Shore was in a somewhat awkward situation at first, as Cornwallis had stayed on in Bengal, expecting an outbreak of war with France, and Shore did not take office as governor-general until 28 October. Accounts of Shore's administration have compared him unfavourably with his famous predecessors, Clive and Hastings, and his successor, Lord Wellesley, citing his preoccupation with carrying out Cornwallis's planned judicial and revenue reforms, instead of seizing opportunities that might have brought more territory and more influence to the British. He was, however, following the explicit instructions of the company and of the British government not to intervene in the internal wars of India but to follow Cornwallis's administrative policies, which he had helped to shape. Not only the implementation of those policies, but to a considerable extent their codification, including the permanent settlement, which was finally accepted by the directors in 1793, were Shore's contribution to building a state in India with an organized bureaucracy carrying out defined legislative and judicial functions. 
Shore's adherence to a policy of non-intervention in the affairs of other Indian states was tested in 1794, when the Marathas, with their headquarters at Poona, attacked the nizam of Hyderabad. The company had made a defensive treaty with both the nizam and the Marathas against Tipu Sultan of Mysore, and the nizam claimed that the British, by the terms of the treaty, were obliged to defend him. Shore refused, explaining in one of his long memoranda that the treaty was only against a common enemy, and that, in any case, the nizam had provoked the Marathas, and that no British interests were at stake (Malcolm, 1.xliv-lxv). An annoying side issue was an attack made by Lord Hobart, the governor of Madras, on Shore in 1796 for not supporting him in his intervention in the affairs of the nawab of Arcot. Denouncing Shore in astonishingly vituperative terms, he demanded his recall, but Henry Dundas at the Board of Control replied that Shore had the confidence of both the company and the government as 'a most able and upright servant of the Public' (Furber, 186). 
Serious criticism of Shore's policies surfaced in London, however, in regard to his handling of a threatened mutiny by the officers of the company's army in 1795-6. Rumour that the London authorities intended to reform the company's army by increasing pay but doing away with corrupt and oppressive practices had alarmed the officers, and they talked of seizing the governor-general and his council. Shore urged caution in making changes that might inflame the officers further, and felt that the situation was so dangerous that he made concessions on pay and supplementary expenses to the officers. The directors, annoyed at what seemed to be his weakness, decided to recall him and asked Lord Cornwallis to go out to restore order in the army, but, as dispatches arrived from Calcutta in 1797, it became apparent that Shore's action had in fact succeeded in re-establishing the authority of the Bengal government. Cornwallis declined the appointment, and Shore stayed on (Callahan, 198). 
The non-interventionist policies, based on what Lord Hobart sneeringly called Shore's principle that 'What is morally wrong cannot be politically right' (Furber, 195), did not preclude direct action, however, when he thought British interests were threatened by the behaviour of the ruler of Oudh, who paid large subsidies to the company for the support of its troops. The death of the nawab, Asaf ud-Daula, in 1797 led to changed relations, for his adopted son, Wazir Ali, appeared to be making military preparations to assert his independence. In addition, Shore received reports that he was behaving in a licentious and degrading manner, that he was base-born, and that factional strife in the court at Lucknow would lead to anarchy in the state, not only depriving the company of the valuable subsidies but threatening the stability of the whole region. Shore went to Lucknow at the end of 1797, and quickly decided that Wazir Ali must be replaced with Saadat Ali, a half-brother of the former nawab, who was more amenable to British control. While he was still at Lucknow in 1798, Shore received word that Lord Mornington (later Marquess Wellesley) had been appointed to succeed him, and that the king had agreed to create Shore Baron Teignmouth in the Irish peerage. 
Critics of Shore's non-interventionist policy in the internal affairs of the Indian states have seen in it proof of his lack of understanding of British destiny in India (Lyall, 235), and this in a sense is true, for Shore had no vision of all the subcontinent permanently united in a British India, but only of the necessity for preserving Bengal for the East India Company and Great Britain. He was convinced, as he wrote in 1794, that the territories in India would not remain 'fifty years longer under our dominion' (Shore, 'Memoir of... Teignmouth', 1.185). At the same time, during his term of office he had come to the conclusion that a great change had taken place in India since he had first arrived thirty years before. British power had become, as he put it, 'a Sovereignty', from having been 'a mere Dependency', but this fact had not been realized in England (ibid., 1.328-9). 
Despite thirty years of intense involvement in India, after his return to England in 1798 Shore seems to have lost interest in the affairs of the East India Company. Instead, as Lord Teignmouth, he settled in 1802 into the life of a country gentleman at Clapham, then a rural village outside London, acting as a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant of Surrey. He also began what amounted to a new career as the first president of the British and Foreign Bible Society, a position that he held until his death in 1834, and which he regarded as of more significance to his own life, and to the world at large, than his service in India. The Bible Society is not given much attention in the standard histories of the nineteenth century, but it was an important component of the evangelical movement in the Church of England that was claiming a new role for the Christian laity, especially among the upper classes, that was reshaping British society. From 1802 to 1808 his neighbours and close friends at Clapham were a group of evangelical Christians who became known as the Clapham Sect, including William Wilberforce, Charles Grant, Henry Thornton, John Venn, and Zachary Macaulay. The anti-slavery campaign is the best known of their activities, but they regarded the Bible Society as fundamental to their work, along with closely related plans for missionary work throughout the world, but especially in India. Teignmouth wrote much of the annual reports of the Bible Society and he also engaged in long debates, through tracts and pamphlets, with its opponents. Some of these argued that the company had wisely forbidden missionaries to work in its territories, and that it was wrong for a former governor-general to use his prestige to encourage conversion to Christianity in India, where such activity would create hostility that might lead to the overthrow of British rule. Others attacked the society because it included nonconformist clergy in its membership and because it did not publish the 'Book of Common Prayer' along with the 'Bible'. Teignmouth answered these attacks in methodical detail. 
In 1807 Teignmouth was appointed a member of the Indian Board of Control, and at the same time he was sworn of the privy council, occasionally hearing appeals relating to India. His authoritative knowledge of British rule in India led to his being called to give evidence, somewhat unwillingly, before committees of the House of Commons on 18 June 1806 and again on 30 March 1813, at a more important session, when the select committee was hearing evidence on the renewing of the company's charter, which he supported as necessary for maintaining British authority. Free trade would not lead, he insisted, to an increase in imports, as the Indian people neither wanted nor could afford British goods; but, reflecting a major concern of his Clapham friends, he saw no reason for continuing to restrict the entry of Christian missionaries to the company's territories, as there was no evidence that their work would antagonize the people of India. 
The Teignmouths left Clapham in 1808, and moved to 4 Portman Square in London, to a house where they lived for the rest of their lives. His personal letters to his children and friends, as well as his articles for the 'Christian Observer' and other religious publications, are marked by a fervent and a pervasive piety, which was based, he said, on 'the doctrines of the Church of England, as those which were delivered by Christ to the Apostles'. These were 'the inherent depravity of man' and salvation by faith alone, to the exclusion of all merit from good works (Shore, 'Memoir of... Teignmouth', 2.46-7). 
Teignmouth died at home in Portman Square on 14 February 1834, and was buried in the parish church of St Marylebone, where his wife, who died on 13 July 1834, was also buried. The monument in the church in their memory states that he was president of the Bible Society before noting that he was governor-general of Bengal. His eldest son, Charles John Shore, succeeded to the title. 
Although Teignmouth's achievements as a revenue official are perhaps remembered only by specialists, all the public and private evidence suggests that he was greatly respected during his Indian career for his hard work, detailed knowledge of revenue systems, financial probity, and sense of justice. Lord Bexley, the son of a former governor of Bengal, Henry Vansittart, and Teignmouth's successor as president of the Bible Society, wrote of 'his dignified courtesy of manners', his 'great sagacity', and his 'utmost candour', and this is affirmed by many others ('Sketch', 274). There is, however, a very different judgement that needs to be noted, considering its source and its appearance in a well-known publication. Lord Wellesley, his successor as governor-general, declared that Teignmouth's 'low birth', added to 'indolence, timidity, and bad health', established 'a systematic degradation of the person, dignity, and authority of the Governor General' (GEC, 'Peerage'). This can only be squared with the widespread judgement that he was a man of 'integrity, humanity, and honour' (Stephen, 277) by recognizing that Wellesley was writing from a new day of pomp and power, of which Teignmouth disapproved, but that, ironically, he had helped to make possible. 


@@@@@


doc= 25453


Shore, Louisa Catherine (1824-1895), poet and writer, was born at Potton, Bedfordshire, on 20 February 1824. She was the fourth of at least five children and the youngest of the three daughters of 
Shore's three daughters were endowed with great literary gifts and enthusiasm for learning. (Margaret) Emily Shore was a gifted poet and writer whose life was cut short by tuberculosis. Louisa Shore spent time in Fulham, Middlesex, as a young woman, where she met Fanny Kemble and Sara Coleridge. She also travelled to France and spent eighteen months in and around Paris between 1851 and 1853. Her first published work was 'War Music', a poem on the Crimean War, which had been sent without her knowledge to 'The Spectator' by her sister Arabella. The poem was reprinted in 'War Lyrics' (1855), a collaboration between the two sisters, who produced three more volumes of poetry together. Louisa Shore's elegy on the deaths of her sister Emily and brother Mackworth Charles (lost at sea in 1860) was favourably compared to George Eliot's 'Oh! may I join the choir invisible' (Shore, 43). In 1861 she published 'Hannibal: a Poem of Two Parts', which received good reviews in 'The Athenaeum' and the 'Saturday Review'. 
Louisa and Arabella Shore were early and enthusiastic advocates of the cause of women. An article by Louisa Shore in the 'Westminster Review' for April 1874, reprinted several times as a pamphlet, contains a prescient discussion of the directions subsequently taken by the women's movement. She lived during the latter part of her life with Arabella at Orchard Poyle, Berkshire, near Taplow, Buckinghamshire. She died, unmarried, at 16 Hillside, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 24 May 1895 and was cremated at Woking crematorium, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 25454


Shore, (Margaret) Emily (1819-1839), writer and naturalist, was born on 25 December 1819 at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, the eldest of the children of Thomas Shore (1793-1863) ['see under 'Shore, Louisa Catherine] and Margaret Anne Twopeny. A writer and educator who declined preferment in the Church of England on matters of conscience, Thomas Shore received private pupils at his home, where he also educated his daughters. All three of Shore's daughters distinguished themselves as writers and editors. Arabella Shore and Louisa Catherine Shore (1824-1895), Emily's younger sisters, were poets, critics, and translators, who eventually served as editors of the remarkable 'Journal of Emily Shore', published in 1891 and reissued with illustrations in 1898. 
Emily Shore herself was a prodigious young polymath who, according to her sisters' introduction to the journal, also produced natural histories, histories of the Jews, the Greeks, and the Romans, two novels, three epics, many poems, and a translation of Xenophon's 'Anabasis'. Of these works only two short essays survive, 'An account of a cuckoo' and 'The Golden Crested Wren', both published by the 'Penny Magazine' in December 1837. Her literary reputation, therefore, rests with her journal, kept from 5 July 1831 until 24 June 1839, a short time before her death at the age of nineteen. It is written in a fine, printed hand and runs to twelve octavo volumes. Only three of these are known to be extant, but portions from all twelve volumes were published in the 1890s editions, more than fifty years after its initial writing. 
Emily Shore's exceptional journal is a 'tour de force', the product of a finely tuned intellect and giving evidence of an unslakeable thirst for learning. Shore, who served as a tutor to her younger siblings, read, digested, and wrote about everything from Shakespeare to Charles Babbage's 'Economy of Manufactures', from contemporary newspapers to classical texts, from the working of printing presses to the classification of flowers. Although she was young and removed from mainstream life, she had her fingers on the pulse of her time. In her journal she commented not merely on daily events in her own life but on institutions such as the London Zoo, and on the 'Reform Bill' of 1832 and the new poor law of 1834. Every day she also spent hours recording the habits of birds in the family garden at Woodbury, Potton, Bedfordshire, observations which were partly detailed in her journal and would lead to her essays in the 'Penny Magazine'. 
Emily Shore's journal is therefore memorable for a number of reasons. First, it offers the life story of the coming of age both of a young woman and of an early Victorian intellect -- one without benefit of formal education. She was initially tutored by her parents but soon became an autodidact. As her sister Arabella said, 'She made her whole existence a happy schoolroom' (Shore, vi). This was particularly true of the natural world. At work on her journal when the 'crazes' for natural history were in full bloom, she was a keen observer and recorder who aimed at working with scientific precision, noting that 'in the study of natural history it is particularly important not to come too hastily to conclusions, but to study facts from observation frequently and most carefully before an inference is drawn' (ibid., 119). The journal also offers one of the finest early examples of a diarist commenting on and experimenting with the diary form. Far from lacking in sophistication, her journal is finely crafted, another example of her care in learning; she found 'the use of the pen... among the most valuable means of improving the mind' (ibid., 138). 
As well as an index to Emily Shore's learning, her feelings, and her sense of the journal form, in its last volume the journal becomes a unique, detailed nineteenth-century meditation on death by tuberculosis. When her family moved her to Madeira for her health's sake, she continued to record her impressions of self and surroundings, but as a naturalist had little energy to learn of new species or to enjoy their beauty and peculiarities. Instead, in the end she turned to read her own body and spirit and wrote the story of their struggles and of the body's ultimate decline. Although she ceased writing letters, which became 'an effort of mind and body which I dread to attempt' (Shore, 345-6), she continued to document her illness in her journal: 'I feel weaker every morning, and suppose I am beginning to sink; still I can at times take up my pen' (ibid., 351). Loath to let her journal go, she would hold a pen at least one more time, on 24 June 1839, a fortnight before her death, when she made a last journal entry in a weakened hand. Emily Shore died of consumption on 7 July 1839 at Funchal, Madeira, and was buried there in the Strangers' burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 25455


Thomas Shore (1793-1863), Church of England clergyman and author, son of the Revd Thomas William Shore (1755/6-1822) of Otterton, Devon, and Juliana Mackworth Praed ('b'. 'c'.1758), who were married at West Teignmouth, Devon, on 8 November 1785. Thomas Shore came from a good family; he was the nephew of John Shore, first Lord Teignmouth (1751-1834), and his mother was the aunt of the poet Winthrop Mackworth Praed. Thomas Shore matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, on 9 June 1810 and graduated BA in 1814 and MA in 1818. He was a scholar at the college from 1812 to 1818. He took orders and married Margaret Anne Twopeny (died 'c'.1859), daughter of the Revd R. Twopeny, at Little Casterton, Rutland, on 19 December 1818. They had at least four other children in addition to Louisa Catherine Shore: (Margaret) Emily Shore (1819-1839), Richard Noel Shore ('bap'. 1821), Arabella Susanna Shore ('bap'. 1822, died in or after 1897), and Mackworth Charles Shore ('bap'. 1825, died 1860). After a short career as a schoolmaster at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and a period at Potton, Bedfordshire, Thomas Shore settled at Everton, Bedfordshire, where he received private pupils, some of whom later attained distinction -- notably Charles John, Earl Canning, George Francis Robert, third Lord Harris, and Granville George Leveson-Gower, second Earl Granville. He also served as curate in the neighbouring parish of Cockayne Hatley. He wrote many classical and theological works but, holding somewhat unorthodox views on religion, declined preferment in the church. In 1863 he published 'The Churchman and the Freethinker, or, A Friendly Address to the Orthodox', a pamphlet which attracted notice. Thomas Shore died on 4 July 1863, at his home at Elmers End, Beckenham, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25456


Shoreditch, Sir John (d. 1345), administrator and diplomat, was of obscure origins. He was styled 'magister' in 1315, presumably of Oxford -- two years later an inquiry was ordered into an allegation that he had been abducted and robbed there. By 1321 he occurs as DCL. 
Sworn of Edward II's council on 18 October 1321 at the Tower, Shoreditch was appointed keeper of the rolls of king's bench on 11 September 1323, and he also became involved in diplomacy. He departed for France on 28 November 1323 bearing Edward's excuses for his inability to come to Amiens to pay homage to Charles IV ('r'. 1322-8) for Guyenne. Shoreditch left Paris in January 1324 but in June returned to France with the earl of Pembroke for a further postponement of homage. He was then one of those directed to surrender the castle of Montpezat in Gascony, and on 18 August was appointed a keeper of the castle; but before the letters arrived the French destroyed it. Between 21 August and 29 September he was in the company of Edward's envoy Henri de Sully, but Charles IV, angered by the destruction of the St Sardos bastide in 1323 and by the English king's failure to perform homage, had confiscated Guyenne and refused to give him audience, an intransigence stressed by Edward in a proclamation of 30 September. On 10 September 1325 Shoreditch received protection for accompanying Prince Edward to France for his investment as duke of Guyenne, but he remained consistently loyal to the Despensers, for which he received a pardon in 1327. Nevertheless, in the parliament of November 1330 he sought redress because Queen Isabella had deprived him of Passenham Manor, Northamptonshire, a gift from the king in 1325. 
With the new reign Shoreditch acted as an advocate in the court of arches (1328-9), but he soon resumed diplomatic activity, being appointed in September 1329, and again in 1330, to treat with Philippe VI of France ('r'. 1328-50). In response to Philippe's demand for liege homage he was directed to study the documents concerning Guyenne, and in January 1331 was a member of the embassy that concluded the treaty of Paris (9 March). With Bishop John Stratford he travelled in December 1331 to Bois-de-Vincennes to discuss a wide range of topics, and returned early in the new year. 
By 1332 Shoreditch was married to a woman named Helen or Elena, and in February 1333, having renounced his clergy at the king's command, he assumed knighthood with a grant of $40 a year. In 1335 he was granted exemption from serving on juries and assizes for life, on account of loyal service. He was appointed a baron of the exchequer on 10 November 1336 and was deputed to deal with petitions of Gascony, Wales, Ireland, and Scotland in the 1340 parliament. But after Stratford's dismissal in 1341 he was deprived until April 1345 of his keepership of the rolls of king's bench. 
From 1332 Shoreditch was frequently abroad. In 1334 he was a member of an embassy to France led by Archbishop Stratford to deal with matters concerning France, Gascony, Ponthieu, and Brittany, and in 1335-6 was engaged in negotiating a prospective marriage between Edward III's infant daughter, Joan of the Tower (died 1362), and Friedrich, son of the duke of Austria, and in seeking alliances with the archbishop of Cologne, the duke of Brabant, and others. As a diplomat he could be aggressive. Baker records (in a narrative misplaced under 1339) that Philippe idiosyncratically complained, not that Edward had adopted his arms, but that in quartering his own with those of France he had placed the leopards of the little island of England in the first quarter. To this Shoreditch responded that the king had adopted current practice ('usitato more modernorum') in placing 'his' progenitors' arms before those acquired 'iure materno' and thus styled himself king of England and France -- in that order. Murimuth recounts his belligerence at the papal curia in 1343, when he expressed the opinions of parliament and king on papal provision, and branded the would-be dean of York, Cardinal Talleyrand, 'the enemy of both king and kingdom' ('Adae Murimuth continuatio chronicarum', 230). In December of that year, and again in 1344 he was appointed envoy to Alfonso XI, king of Castile ('r'. 1312-50). 
In the 1330s Shoreditch assisted the Westminster monks in the appropriation of Longdon church, Worcestershire, and was granted a mortmain licence in 1338 to found a chantry of three chaplains in the abbey; in the event, a chantry for two monk-chaplains was established at St Benedict's altar. Shoreditch was murdered on 10 July 1345 in his house at Ware, Hertfordshire, by four of his servants, who were subsequently hanged. 


@@@@@


doc= 25457


Short, Augustus (1802-1883), bishop of Adelaide, third son of Charles Short, barrister, of the Middle Temple, London, was born on 11 June 1802. In 1809 he entered Westminster School, where his early days were the 'most wretched' in his life, though relieved by the kindness of Charles Thomas Longley, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury. He was withdrawn for a time to a school at Langley Broom, near Slough, but returned to Westminster in 1811. He passed to Christ Church, Oxford, in May 1820, where he was placed under his cousin, Thomas Vowler Short, and took a first class in classics in 1823. He graduated BA in 1824 and MA in 1826. Short at first taught as a private tutor, but in 1826 he was ordained deacon at Oxford, and in 1827 priest, and licensed to the curacy of Culham, Oxfordshire. He resigned in 1829, on becoming tutor and lecturer at Christ Church; he was appointed librarian and censor in 1833, and in 1843 was select preacher to the university. In 1835 he accepted the living of Ravensthorpe, Northamptonshire, and in the same year he married Millicent Clara, 'nee' Phillips. The parish had been neglected, but Short rapidly organized it on a satisfactory basis. He had many friends among the Tractarians, and wrote (but did not publish) a defence of 'Tract 90', though he voted for the condemnation of W. G. Ward's 'Ideal of a Christian Church' in 1845. In 1846 he delivered at Oxford the Bampton lectures entitled 'The Witness of the Spirit with our Spirit'. 
On the foundation in 1847 of the colonial sees of Cape Town, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Newcastle, Short was offered the choice of Adelaide or Newcastle. He chose the former, and was consecrated on 29 June 1847 and created DD of Oxford on 16 June. He sailed in September, and reached his diocese in December. There were on his arrival only eight Anglican clergy in his huge diocese (which included South and Western Australia), and the bishop's difficulties were further increased in 1851 by the discontinuance of the vote for maintenance of public worship. The young diocese was thus cast entirely upon its own resources. However, on a visit to England in 1853, Short found that the diocese could be organized with a constitution of its own, and he proceeded to set its affairs in order. In this he was completely successful, and showed himself a very capable administrator, his first synod being assembled in Adelaide in January 1855. He did his best to meet the needs of scattered communities in the bush, was keenly interested in work for the Aborigines (writing 'Mission to the Heathen' in 1853), did much for the organization of education in the colony, and secured the building of Adelaide Cathedral in 1849. He was active in founding the University of Adelaide and was its vice-chancellor in 1874 and its chancellor from 1876. Short was, however, quite a controversial bishop, in that his Tractarian sympathies upset his chiefly evangelical flock. He visited England for the Lambeth conference of 1878. 
Short was attacked by heart disease in 1881, and resigned the see. He left Australia in 1882, amid general expressions of respect, and took up his residence in London; but his illness returned, and he retired to Eastbourne, Sussex, where he died at his home, Sultan House, on 5 October 1883, his wife surviving him. 
His eldest brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 25458


Charles William Short (1799-1857), joined the Coldstream Guards as ensign in 1814, was present with his regiment at Quatre Bras and in the defence of Hougoumont at Waterloo, and served in the army of occupation. In 1837 he left the army as captain and lieutenant-colonel, and became a merchant. In 1852 he went to live at Odiham in Hampshire, where, as in London, he was noted for his religious and philanthropic activity. He published treatises on the duties of the soldier, which had a wide circulation. He died at Odiham on 19 January 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 25459


Short, James (1710-1768), maker of optical instruments, was born in Edinburgh on 10 June 1710, the son of William Short, a wright, and his wife, Margaret Grierson; he was supposedly named after James Francis Edward Stuart, the Old Pretender. Following his parents' deaths he was accepted as a pupil in George Heriot's Hospital on 18 April 1720, and then at the age of twelve transferred to the Royal High School, Edinburgh, where he showed considerable ability in the classics. After matriculating in 1726 at Edinburgh University, he followed the arts courses but did not graduate. A pious grandmother had prevailed on him to enter the church, so he studied divinity and is said to have passed his trials for the ministry in 1731. However, he was inspired by the lectures of Colin MacLaurin, professor of mathematics at the university, to abandon divinity for mathematics and astronomy. 
Under MacLaurin's guidance and friendship Short developed an interest in astronomical optics, and used his friend's rooms for early attempts at making telescopes in 1732. Soon he improved the metallic specula prescribed by Newton for the reflecting telescope, and, having mastered the art of grinding and polishing parabolic mirrors, he was making sophisticated instruments of several different sizes by 1734. He was far excelling other makers, according to MacLaurin, who drew the Royal Society's attention to his talent in 1735. Tests of his instruments followed in 1736, and that summer in London he instructed William, duke of Cumberland, in mathematics. His skills as a maker were recognized by his election to the Royal Society on 24 March 1737. The annular eclipse of 1737 and a comet that year stimulated astronomical activity in MacLaurin's circle and helped lead to the formation of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh, of which Short was a founder member and the only one engaged in trade. Through the society's concentration of the professional and landed classes, Short found patronage for his telescopes and participated in astronomical observations. He enjoyed the particular favour of Lord Aberdour, later the earl of Morton, for whom he carried out survey work on his Orkney lands in 1739, and both made and repaired instruments. He also executed a model straw cutting machine in 1742 to satisfy Morton's agricultural interests, and made astronomical observations with him. 
Short produced about 180 telescopes in Edinburgh before moving to London in April 1738, no doubt attracted by its wider horizons as a leading centre of European science. His earnings in Scotland had been considerable as early as 1736, when he acquired $3000 Scots of Bank of Scotland stock. The earl of Buchan stated that he banked $500 profit by the time he left Scotland, when he sensibly appointed a factor to look after his Scottish finances. His business acumen was considerable, for he continued to prosper in London as a pre-eminent maker of a range of sizes of reflecting telescopes, charging double his rivals' prices. His output from his workshop in Surrey Street, Strand, was exceptionally specialized but it was steady, and he made about 1370 reflecting telescopes in all. 
Short's British reputation was quickly established and spread wider as scientists and academics across Europe sought him out. Among his commissioned instruments was one of an 18 inch aperture for the king of Spain, completed in 1752 and costing $1200. An instrument for Uppsala gained for him the rare distinction of foreign membership of the Royal Swedish Academy of Science in 1758. Such honours mattered to him, for he successfully applied to the University of St Andrews for the degree of MA in 1753. His instrument sales were helped by the vogue for astronomical observations among gentlemen and academic scientists, with whom he frequently made observations, notably during the transit of Venus in 1761, when he was one of the Royal Society's observers and supplied instruments. Interest in this event generated commissions in anticipation of the 1769 transit. As an active member of the society, Short communicated many of his observations from 1736 until 1763, including his calculation of solar parallax from the 1761 transit, which was long accepted. He occasionally assessed others' contributions. 
Short numbered London's leading instrument makers among his friends. He made observations with George Graham, and early encouraged John Dollond's improvements to the achromatic refracting telescope which ultimately provided instruments to rival his own. An interest in calculating longitude led to his appointment in 1763 to the parliamentary committee to test a timekeeper devised by John Harrison, with whom he became friends. He may have penned an anonymous account of Harrison's work printed that year. His support for Harrison's claim to the longitude prize seems to have caused his patron Lord Morton, then president of the Royal Society, to oppose his candidature for the post of astronomer royal in 1764, though he reportedly acknowledged Short's superior qualifications. Short's criticisms of observations at Greenwich perhaps contributed to his failure to gain the office. 
Before the rift with his patron, Short was a friend to the family and an occasional agent in its affairs. This reflected his links with other Scots in London, and his continuing ties to Scotland, where his brother Thomas traded as an instrument maker in Leith, and from whence he derived income from his stock and personal loans, as well as the occasional commission. In London, as well as his social connections through the Royal Society and the Royal Society of Arts, of which he was a founder in 1754, Short was friendly with migrant Scots ['see 'Founders of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce]. It was to him that James Watt carried an introduction in 1755, and through him found employment. David Hume joked in 1759 that Short was secretly married to a Miss Elliot, who with her sister ran the respectable boarding house where Hume and other Scots stayed, though it is known that he died unmarried. 
Short remained active until his death from a disease of the bowel, which occurred on 15 June 1768, at his lodgings at Newington Butts near London. His business was continued by his brother Thomas Short from 1768 until 1776, when he returned to Edinburgh. James Short left most of his considerable fortune derived from his skill at polishing metal mirrors to his nephew, as well as bequests to friends. Among them was Lady Mary Douglas, Lord Morton's eldest surviving daughter, to whom he left $1000 and the reversion of his estate, which may have amounted to as much as $20,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 25460


Short, Thomas (1635-1685), physician, son of the Revd William Short and his wife, Mary, was born on 25 November 1635 at Euston, Suffolk. He was sent to the grammar school of Bury St Edmunds, and from there to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted a sizar on 25 February 1650, aged fourteen. He graduated BA in 1654 and was created MD by royal mandate on 26 June 1668. Short settled in London and was admitted a candidate at the College of Physicians in December 1668, but was not elected a fellow until 29 July 1675. He had joined the Church of Rome, and, in accordance with an order of the House of Lords for the ejection of Roman Catholics, was summoned to attend a meeting of the Royal College of Physicians on 14 April 1679. He did so, but the feeling of the college was against intolerant proceedings; a quorum was not present, and no steps were taken. He attained considerable practice, and Thomas Sydenham, who had met him in consultation, found his 'genius disposed for the practice of physick' ('Whole Works', 339), and praised both his learning and sagacity. Sydenham prefixed to 'A Treatise of the Gout and Dropsy' a letter to Short in which occurs a famous passage on posthumous fame which Fielding quoted in 'Tom Jones'. Short, who had a son, William ('b'. 1672), died on 28 September 1685, and was buried in St James's Chapel, London. Bishop Burnet, who thought that Charles II died of poison, also believed that Short was poisoned by his co-religionists for asserting that the king was poisoned ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.609). Richard Lower and Walter Needham seem to have been unable to resist an opportunity of imposing upon the whig historian's credulity. 


@@@@@


doc= 25461


Short, Thomas (c.1690-1772), physician, was born in the south of Scotland, and, after graduating in medicine, settled in practice at Sheffield. 
In 1713 William Steel told him the secret, which he afterwards published, of making cerated glass of antimony as a cure for dysentery. He made several journeys to visit the mineral springs of Yorkshire and of other parts of England, becoming an expert on the medicinal uses and analysis of water. Following thirty years of research in the chemical analysis of mineral waters, in 1766 he published the first attempt to systematize tests, entitled 'Institutes, or, An Introduction to the Examination of Mineral Waters'. Prior to this he had published 'A Rational Discourse on the Inward Use of Waters' (1725). In 1750 Short published 'New Observations on the Bills of Mortality', in which he continued the work of John Graunt and Sir William Petty, and treated the subject in relation to observations he had made on the effect of the air on health. He spent eighteen years on this work. 
Short wrote several other works on medicine, among them studies on the medical effects of tea, milk, sugar, and spirits. In 1767 he published 'A Comparative History of the Increase and Decrease of Mankind', in which he advocated early marriages, denounced alcohol 'as a Stygian poison', and collected much historical and medical information. He died in 1772. 


@@@@@


doc= 25462


Short, Thomas Vowler (1790-1872), bishop of St Asaph, was the eldest son of William Short (died 1826), archdeacon of Cornwall, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Hodgkinson, headmaster of the grammar school at Exeter. Augustus Short was his cousin. He was born on 16 September 1790 at Vicarage House, Dawlish, Devon, where his father was curate. After spending a year at Exeter grammar school Short was sent to Westminster School in 1803, from where he passed with a studentship to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1809. He took a first class in classics and in mathematics in 1812, and in the following year was ordained deacon by the bishop of Oxford. He graduated BA in 1813, MA in 1815, BD in 1824, and DD in 1837. In 1814 Short became perpetual curate of Drayton, Oxfordshire, but he resigned this cure in 1815 in order to undertake academic offices in Christ Church. He became successively tutor and censor (1816-29), librarian (1822), and catechist and Busby lecturer (1825); in 1823 he was proctor. Having served as an examiner at Oxford between 1820 and 1824 he published influential suggestions (1822) for the improvement of the examination system, but the changes he sought were not effected until 1830. He published 'Twenty Sermons on the Fundamental Truths of Christianity' in 1829. Though Short left Christ Church before the Oxford Movement really began, he was well acquainted with most of its leaders. Pusey, a favourite pupil, always acknowledged his influence, and 'Short held a first place in his affection and respect to the last hour of his life' (Liddon, 'Life of Pusey', 1.24). Short examined Newman for his degree, and Keble he numbered among his close friends. W. E. Gladstone was one of his pupils. Short is to be distinguished from Thomas Short (1789-1879), a celebrated contemporary and tutor of Trinity College. 
Short's departure from Oxford in 1829 followed the fiasco of Sir Robert Peel's defeat in the university election, Short having been one of Peel's most energetic supporters. He had held the Christ Church living of Cowley from 1816 to 1823, when he was presented to the rectory of Stockleigh Pomeroy, Devon. In 1826 he succeeded his father to the rectory of King's Worthy, Hampshire, which was in the gift of his father's kinsman Sir Thomas Baring. He went to reside there in 1829, forming a household with his mother (the subject of his 'Letters to an Aged Mother' published in 1841) and two sisters. A member of the National Society and of the Winchester Bible Society, he was a keen promoter of education, building a school in his parish in 1830. In 1832 he published a two-volume history of the Church of England to 1688, which went through several editions and was widely used by ordinands. He married on 26 February 1833 Mary, daughter of Revd Charles Davies of Pembroke College and widow of John Josias Conybeare. 
In 1834 Short was presented by the lord chancellor, Brougham, to the rectory of St George's, Bloomsbury, where he acquired a reputation as a conscientious parish priest. He promoted benefit societies, a Sunday school, a lending library, and a visiting society, which he described in tracts published as 'Parochialia' (1842) for the guidance of other clergy. Reckoned a serious-minded practical clergyman, tending to evangelicalism, though regarded by Richard Whately as being intellectually of 'third rate talents' (Brent, 130), he was in 1837 appointed deputy clerk to the closet to the queen. His former pupil Francis Baring advanced his claims as an earnest churchman, and Lord Melbourne appointed him bishop of Sodor and Man, where he was consecrated on 30 May 1841. His first charge (1842) lamented the widespread disaffection from the church and he set about visiting the parishes and improving the education of candidates for ordination. On 27 October 1846 he was translated, on the recommendation of Lord John Russell, to the see of St Asaph. He immediately established a diocesan board of education, building new schools, developing a reading method known as the 'look and say' system, and providing textbooks in which lessons were printed in both English and Welsh. In a public controversy with one of his clergy Short was accused of the inability to read Welsh or conduct services in the language and of harbouring an animosity towards the Welsh people ('Correspondence and statement of facts, connected with the case of the Revd Richard Williams Morgan', 1856). When he resigned the see on 22 February 1870 it was stated that every parish had a school and a resident incumbent, Short himself having for many years spent half of his episcopal income on diocesan purposes. Short died on 13 April 1872 at Gresford vicarage, Denbighshire, the home of his brother-in-law and former chaplain, Robert Wickham (died 1880). 


@@@@@


doc= 25463


Shortal, Sebastian (d. 1639), Cistercian monk and titular abbot of Bective, Meath, was born in co. Kilkenny. There he received his primary education before travelling to Spain about 1610, where he became a Cistercian monk at Nucale in Galicia. He taught philosophy in the seminary of St Claudius in Nucale and later in the monastery of Mons Ramorum. In 1619 he set out for Ireland accompanied by the Cistercian chronicler Malachy Hartry. 'En route' Shortal was taken captive by Moors. On his release he proceeded to Ireland, where he was appointed abbot of St Mary's in Bective some time before 1621. The abbey was long deserted so he settled down nearby and engaged in pastoral activity. In 1626 he was among the signatories of an 'Attestation of Cistercians' in favour of the Franciscan Thomas Fleming, archbishop of Dublin, who was experiencing opposition from his clergy. In 1628 he signed a letter to the abbot of Citeaux and in 1631 he rallied to the defence of certain Dublin regulars in a bitter dispute with a number of secular priests. 
About this time Shortal became involved in a dispute with the bishop of Meath, Thomas Dease, concerning Shortal's title to Bective Abbey. Relations between regular and secular clergy were frequently tense at this time because of competition for scarce resources, jurisdictional problems concerning pre-Reformation privileges, and disagreements over disputed titles. In 1633 Shortal participated in the regulation of a serious matter of discipline concerning the titular abbot of Abbeyleix, Gerard Purcell. Just before his death on 11 December 1639 he was one of the readers of Hartry's 'Triumphalia sanctae crucis', which he approved for publication. 
Shortal was an accomplished composer of Latin verse. He wrote a verse history of the institution of the feast of Corpus Christi called 'Historia institutionis festivitatis v. sacramenti B. Julianae Corneliensi ord. Cist. divinitus revelatae, versu hexametro', a verse life of the Irish Cistercian Candidus Furlong (1576-1616) entitled 'Vita Candidi Furlongi, monachi Nucalensis, heroico carmine', and a collection of pieces in honour of the same person called 'De laudibus Candidi Furlongi: hymi, variaque ac erudita epitaphia'. According to Hartry, Shortal was buried in the ruined monastery of St Dominick. 


@@@@@


doc= 25464


Shortland, Edward (1812-1893), physician and ethnographer in New Zealand, born at Courtlands, near Lympstone, Devon, and baptized at Charles, Devon, on 19 May 1812, was the third son of Captain Thomas George Shortland, of Courtlands, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Peter Tonkin of Plymouth. His brothers were Willoughby Shortland and Peter Frederick Shortland. He was educated at Exeter grammar school, and Harrow School, and Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1831 and graduated BA in 1835 and MA in 1839. He then studied medicine, and was admitted an extra-licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1839. In 1841 he travelled, apparently at his brother Willoughby's suggestion, to New Zealand, where on 25 June 1841 he became private secretary to the governor, William Hobson. In 1842 he was appointed police magistrate and sub-protector of aborigines. On 10 August 1843 he landed at Akaroa on Banks peninsula, to act as interpreter to Colonel Godfrey's court of inquiry into the land claims of the French company which was then endeavouring to establish itself in that area. After the court was closed he took a census of South Island Maori settlements, travelling extensively in Otago and coastal Canterbury. His authoritative observations on Maori life, traditions, and language were recorded in his journals. He continued in government employment as sub-protector of aborigines and interpreter until his departure for Europe in 1846. 

'The Southern Districts of New Zealand' (1851) and 'Traditions and Superstitions of the New Zealanders' (1854) were published while Shortland was living in Plymouth and practising medicine. In 1860 he served in Garibaldi's Sicilian campaign. In 1862 he returned to New Zealand as civil commissioner appointed to manage Maori affairs in the Hauraki area, and on 14 August 1863 he was appointed native secretary, but he returned to England in 1865. From 1869 to 1873, and from 1880 to 1889, he again resided in New Zealand. During this time he published his major work, 'Maori Religion and Mythology' (1882), as well as contributing a seminal article to the first volume of 'Transactions of the New Zealand Institute' and publishing a Maori-language textbook (1883). 
On his final departure for England in October 1889 Shortland was described as 'the most efficient Maori scholar probably the colony possesses', and he was competent and far-sighted in his administrative positions. He died at Colguill Villa, Compton Gifford, Devon, on 2 July 1893, survived by his wife, Eugenia, 'nee' Hardie, whom he had married at an unknown date, and with whom he had had four sons and seven daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 25465


Shortland, John (1769-1810), naval officer, born on 5 September 1769, was the elder son of Commander John Shortland (1736-1804), with whom he has sometimes been confused; he was the elder brother of Thomas George Shortland (1771-1827). He entered the navy in 1781 under his father, then employed in transport service to and from North America. He was afterwards in the 'Surprise', and from 1783 to 1787 in the frigate 'Latona' in the West Indies. On his return to England in 1787 he joined the 'Sirius' (Captain John Hunter) and in her went out to New South Wales, made the voyage to the Cape of Good Hope, and was wrecked at Norfolk Island, from where he returned to England with Hunter in April 1792. On 10 October 1793 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Arrogant', and in 1795 he was selected by Hunter as first lieutenant of the discovery vessel 'Reliance', in which Hunter was going out as governor of New South Wales. As Hunter's duties detained him on shore, Shortland was in acting command of the ship, in which he made several voyages to the Cape of Good Hope, Tahiti, and New Zealand. He was granted land in Australia but returned to England with Hunter in 1801, and, having been promoted commander on 1 January 1801, he was appointed transport agent for the expedition to Egypt. The following year he commanded the cutter 'Dolphin', from which he was moved to the sloop 'Trompeuse' (18 guns) going out to the Guinea coast, where, on a death vacancy, he was promoted captain of the 'Squirrel' (24 guns). On his return to England his commission as captain was confirmed, to date from 6 August 1805. He was then sent out to the Halifax station, where, in February 1809, he was transferred to the frigate 'Junon' (36 guns). In September he sailed for the West Indies, being then a hundred men short of complement, and on 13 December fell in with four large frigates sailing under Spanish colours. They proved able to answer the private signals, and Shortland consequently stood towards them to gain intelligence of the enemy. But, when the 'Junon' was well within gunshot, they struck the Spanish colours, hoisted French, and poured in their broadsides. Notwithstanding the odds against him he defended his ship with the utmost gallantry until he was carried below, dangerously wounded. The 'Junon', which had lost ninety men killed and wounded, was then boarded and captured, but she was such a complete wreck that she was cleared out and set on fire. Shortland had both legs and his left arm shattered, and also had a severe wound in his side, and others less serious. His mangled body was taken on one of the French frigates and was afterwards sent, 13 miles in a canoe under a blazing sun, to the hospital at Guadeloupe, where he died, unmarried, on 21 January 1810 and where he was buried at Basse Terre with military honours. 


@@@@@


doc= 25466


Shortland, Peter Frederick (1815-1888), naval officer, born on 15 November 1815, was the son of Captain Thomas George Shortland RN (1771-1827) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Tonkin. His brothers were Willoughby Shortland and Edward Shortland. He entered the Royal Naval College at Portsmouth in January 1827, and, having passed with distinction, served afloat until 1834, when, on 4 December, he passed the examination for lieutenant. In 1836-8 he was a mate on the 'Rattlesnake' in Australian waters, and, on the settlement of Melbourne, made a survey of Port Phillip. After returning to England in 1838 he obtained leave, matriculated at Cambridge as a member of Pembroke College, and in 1842 graduated seventh wrangler. He then applied to join the 'Excellent' to compete for the commission at that time offered as a prize to young officers passing a course of gunnery and mathematics; but, as the advent of a seventh wrangler seemed likely to kill all competition, the Admiralty promoted him at once, on 1 April 1842. He was then appointed to the steamer 'Columbia' for surveying duties on the coast of North America. 
Soon after arriving on station Shortland succeeded to the command. In 1848 he married Emily Marilin, the daughter of Captain Thomas Jones of the 74th regiment; they had children. As lieutenant, as commander (20 January 1848), and as captain (1 January 1859) Shortland continued on the same station until 1865, making a complete survey of the coast of Nova Scotia, including the Bay of Fundy, for which he was specially thanked by the Admiralty. He was then appointed to the 'Hydra' for surveying service in the Mediterranean, but in 1867 was sent to the East Indies to take a line of deep-sea soundings from Aden to Bombay. The 'Hydra' was paid off in 1868, and Shortland, at the request of the Admiralty, wrote an account of the operation in 'A Sounding Voyage of HMS Hydra' (1868). On attaining the age of fifty-five in 1870 he was placed on the retired list. He then qualified as a barrister and on 27 January 1873 was called to the bar; he practised in the Admiralty court. He became rear-admiral on 21 September 1876 and vice-admiral on 3 January 1881. He was the author of 'A Short Account of the Laws which Govern HM Navy' (1886) and of 'Nautical Surveying' (1890), published posthumously. He died at his home, 6 Hoe Villas, Plymouth, on 18 October 1888, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 25467


Shortland, Thomas George (1771-1827), naval officer, son of Commander John Shortland (1736-1804) and younger brother of Captain John Shortland (1769-1810), was born at Portsea, Hampshire, on 10 May 1771. In January 1785 he entered the navy on the 'Irresistible', flying the broad pennant of Sir Andrew Snape Hamond in the English Channel. In March 1787 he was moved to the 'Alexander', one of the little squadron going out to New South Wales with Commodore Arthur Phillip, and served in her until her return to England in May 1789. He was then employed in the channel and the North Sea, and on 19 November 1790 was promoted lieutenant of the sloop 'Speedy'. In January 1793 he was appointed to the frigate 'Nemesis', which accompanied the fleet under Lord Hood to the Mediterranean. In September 1794 he was moved into the 'Romney', with Sir Charles Hamilton whom, in April 1795, he followed to the 'Melpomene'. On the night of 3-4 August 1798 he commanded the boats of the frigate in cutting out the armed brig 'Aventurier' from under the batteries in the Bay of Correjou, on the north coast of Brittany -- a gallant exploit, for which he was promoted commander on 20 April 1799 and appointed to the sloop 'Voltigeur' on the Newfoundland station. In summer 1801 he was appointed temporarily to the 80-gun ship 'Donegal', then in dock at Plymouth, and, as a reward for his extraordinary exertions in fitting her for sea, he was made acting captain of the frigate 'Dedaigneuse' (36 guns; rank and command confirmed on 1 March 1802). He took her to the East Indies but was compelled by ill health to return to England in spring 1803. He was afterwards for a short time captain of the 'Britannia' (100 guns), and of the 'Caesar' (80 guns) bearing the flag of Sir Richard John Strachan. 
In summer 1806 Shortland joined the 'Canopus' (80 guns), as flag captain to Sir Thomas Louis and commanded her when she led the squadron of Sir John Thomas Duckworth through the Dardanelles in February and March 1807. After the death of Louis, Shortland continued for some months in command of the 'Canopus', but in September 1807 he was moved into the 'Queen' (98 guns), still in the Mediterranean, and remained in her until the end of 1808. In 1809 he commanded the 'Valiant' (74 guns) in the expedition to the Scheldt; in 1810-11 the frigate 'Iris', off Cadiz and in the West Indies; and in 1812-13 the 'Royal Oak' (74 guns) as flag captain to Lord Amelius Beauclerk. In November 1813 he was appointed agent for prisoners of war at Dartmoor; from April 1816 to April 1819 he was captain-superintendent of the ordinary at Plymouth; and for the next three years he was comptroller-general of the preventive boat service. On 14 July 1825 he was appointed resident commissioner at Jamaica, where he died towards the end of 1827. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Peter Tonkin of Plymouth; they had a large family. Three of their sons, Edward Shortland, Peter Frederick Shortland, and Willoughby Shortland, are separately noticed. 


@@@@@


doc= 25468


Shortland, Willoughby (1804-1869), naval officer and colonial administrator, born at Plymouth, Devon, on 30 September 1804, was the son of Captain Thomas George Shortland, of Courtlands, near Lympstone, Devon, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Peter Tonkin of Plymouth. His younger brothers were Edward Shortland and Peter Frederick Shortland. He was educated at the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth (1818-20), having entered the service on 9 January 1818. He was gazetted a lieutenant on 18 August 1828 and served on the Jamaica station. On 21 March 1831 he took the command of the 'Skipjack', a schooner of five guns, and remained with her in the West Indies until he was invalided home in June 1833. In 1839 he accompanied Captain William Hobson, the first governor-designate of New Zealand, to that colony via New South Wales, where Hobson appointed him chief magistrate and superintendent of police for New Zealand. 
In 1841 Shortland married Isabella Kate Johnston, the daughter of Robert A. Fitzgerald, of Geraldine, co. Limerick, Ireland, and in May 1841 he was appointed colonial secretary. He proceeded to Port Nicholson, Wellington, and in dissolving the settlers' council there he aroused resentment among the New Zealand Company settlers. After the death of Captain Hobson on 10 September 1842, Shortland administered the government of New Zealand until his dismissal by the newly arrived Captain Robert FitzRoy on 31 December 1843. During Shortland's temporary government he was widely slated for financial and tactical imprudence. Following the fatal encounter between Maori and settlers at Wairau on 17 June 1843, in his dispatches to the home government he expressed his disapproval of the conduct of the settlers, to which he attributed the massacre. This action made him unpopular, and, when a report of his nomination as governor of New Zealand was circulated, a petition was sent from Auckland praying that he might not be appointed. 
Still in favour with the Colonial Office, however, Shortland was in 1845 appointed president of Nevis in the Leeward Islands, and from 10 January 1854 until 1856 served as governor of Tobago. In July 1864 he retired from the navy with the rank of commander. He returned to England and resided on his property, Courtlands, Charleton, Kingsbridge, Devon, until his death there on 7 October 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 25469


Shorton, Robert (d. 1535), college head, is of unknown parentage and place of birth, although a northern origin is likely. He graduated BA from Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1501, is recorded as fellow of Jesus in 1503, and was elected fellow of Pembroke College on 25 November 1505, treasurer in 1509, and lector in divinity some time between 1509 and February 1511. Shorton's treasurership prepared him for his duties at St John's, of which he was officially designated master in its foundation charter (9 April 1511). He owed his preferment to John Fisher as his letter of thanks, dated 6 February 1511, makes clear. He remained master until an uncertain date in 1516. His main task was to supervise the building of the college, and his accounts survive between 31 January 1511 and 21 January 1516. Legal problems, including a boundary dispute with the King's Hall, also had to be resolved. At an unknown date he donated $10 to the college to pave the hall. 
On 21 October, most probably in 1516, the fellows of Pembroke College invited Shorton to return as master, stressing his virtue and learning, and the advantage to the college of having as master one who had been nurtured by it. They were correct in anticipating generosity. Shorton added properties near and at Orton Waterville, Huntingdonshire, to the manor and advowson of Orton already owned by the college. These were the manor of Chesterton Vescie, conveyed in 1518, and Rowse's estate, consisting of a messuage, three tofts and gardens, and 61 acres, conveyed in 1525. He also gave Pembroke chapel sets of white damask vestments for priest, deacon, and subdeacon, for the soul of Master William Thomson. 
In the 1520s Shorton rose to eminence. He gained high-church preferments, some via the patronage of Cardinal Wolsey, for whose college at Oxford he selected some scholars. By 1527 he was dean of the cardinal's own chapel, and in that year was appointed canon and prebendary of St George's Chapel, Windsor. From 1529 he was dean of the collegiate college of Stoke by Clare, Suffolk, and archdeacon of Bath. He resigned the mastership of Pembroke in 1534 or early 1535. He was almoner to Queen Katherine of Aragon, and is reported to have spoken in her favour when consulted about her divorce from Henry VIII. Nevertheless, Shorton maintained amicable relations with Cromwell. He wrote on 27 June 1535 approving Cromwell's reformation of Stoke College, and bequeathed him five pieces of arras. 
Shorton's will, dated 8 October 1535, requested burial at the college of Stoke by Clare, and left sums for the poor of twenty towns, including Newport, Essex, where he was master of St Leonard's Hospital, and to his tenants at Wells, probably Norfolk, and his parishes of Sedgefield, co. Durham, and Lowther, Westmorland. Noteworthy among the bequests was a gilt salt with a cover 'antyke' to Thomas Legh, and the sum of $40 to maintain highways in Essex. Separately he arranged for obits at Pembroke, St John's, St Catharine's, and Peterhouse, accompanied by distributions to the fellows. That at Peterhouse contains a reference to keeping the obit for twenty years 'or for so long as the king's laws will suffer it'. In 1546 it was reported that he had left the funds to buy the greater part of a farm at Whittlesford to endow his obit at Pembroke. He died on or about 17 October 1535, and his will was proved on 8 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 25470


Shovell, Sir Cloudesley (bap. 1650, d. 1707), naval officer, baptized on 25 November 1650 at Cockthorpe, on the north Norfolk coast, was the son of John Shovell (1625-1654), from a Norwich family of property and distinction, and Anne ('bap'. 1628, died 1709), daughter of Henry Jenkinson of Cley. His unusual forename derives from the family name of his maternal grandmother, Lucy Cloudesley (1608-1627), and his uncle Cloudesley Jenkinson (1639-1696). Cloudesley Shovell's father died when he was about four and his mother married John Flaxman (died 1687) in 1659. 
Shovell first went to sea through his father's connections with two naval officers from Cockthorpe, Sir Christopher Myngs and Sir John Narbrough. In 1663 he was with Myngs in the West Indies as a cabin-boy and servant. After Myngs's death in the Four Days' Battle in June 1666 he continued with Narbrough in the same capacity. He was with him in 1667 when Narbrough took Cayenne and perhaps on Narbrough's voyage to the Pacific in 1670-71. The first official record of Shovell's naval service is dated 22 January 1672, when he entered as a midshipman on board the duke of York's flagship 'Royal Prince' seventeen days after the duke appointed Captain Narbrough his first lieutenant in that ship. 
With Narbrough, Shovell was present at the battle of Solebay on 28 May 1672. On 17 September 1672 he followed him as a master's mate, one of the 210 volunteers from 'Royal Prince' who moved into 'Fairfax'. When Narbrough shifted command to 'St Michael', Shovell followed in the same capacity. Later in the same year he followed him again to 'Henrietta', where, through Narbrough's influence, Shovell was appointed second lieutenant on 23 September 1673. Shortly afterwards they sailed to the Mediterranean for the naval campaign against Tripoli. In 1675 Narbrough moved to the 'Harwich', and Shovell followed as a lieutenant. On 14 January 1676 Shovell commanded the squadron's boats that burned shipping in Tripoli harbour and earned himself fame through Narbrough's dispatch describing the action, which was subsequently printed ('London Gazette'). Even before its publication Pepys wrote to Narbrough about 'Lieutenant Shovell, with whose management his Majesty and my lords are most particularly satisfied' (Tanner, 3.179; 4.295). Narbrough rewarded the boat crews with 1956 pieces of eight, of which Shovell received 80, the largest amount, and to which Charles II added a further reward, including a medal valued at the exceptional amount of $100. On 3 May 1677 Shovell was appointed first lieutenant in Narbrough's flagship, the 'Plymouth', and joined Narbrough in attesting to a report on the satisfactory state of work being done on the new mole at Tangier. 
In September 1677, when Thomas Harman died of his wounds in the action with the 'Golden Horse', Narbrough appointed Shovell to take Harman's place in command of the 28-gun 'Sapphire'. In her he made a dramatic chase of a 44-gun Turkish warship from Tripoli to the Spanish coast, which only narrowly escaped capture in October 1677. As Narbrough prepared for his departure for England in the spring of 1679, Shovell assisted the admiral and the commissioners who concluded a peace treaty with Tripoli, for which Shovell received $100 as a reward. Narbrough and his vice-admiral, Arthur Herbert, shifted Shovell from one command to another as they attempted to deal with the conflicting demands of the Algerine war and the defence of Tangier from Sale. In April-May 1679 Herbert placed Shovell in command of the 36-gun 'Phoenix'; then, in May, the Admiralty ordered him back to 'Sapphire'. In July 1680 Herbert moved him to the 'Nonsuch', then, in September, at Shovell's request, returned him to the 'Sapphire'. Finally, in April 1681, Herbert moved him to the 30-gun 'James Galley', where he remained for the next five years. In her he assisted the 'Sapphire' in capturing the 32-gun Algerine cruiser 'Half Moon' in September, and in December joined the 'Adventure' in driving the 34-gun Algerine corsair 'Flower-Pot' ashore near Mazagan. In April 1682 he assisted Herbert in the treaty that ended the four and a half year long war with Algiers. In May and in November he was also at Tripoli for negotiations. When the Admiralty ordered Herbert home, Shovell remained for a year in command of the five-ship Mediterranean squadron. 
At Cadiz on 23 June 1683 to convoy English merchantmen, Shovell was pressured by the conde de Aguilar into saluting the Spanish king without receiving a return salute to his own sovereign. He complied with this demand to protect the merchantmen, whose cargoes would have otherwise been seized or destroyed, but his decision outraged Pepys and Lord Dartmouth, both of whom vowed to court-martial him. However, when the circumstances were reported to the king, Charles II placed no blame on Shovell. 
Shovell irritated Pepys again after Dartmouth arrived with the fleet in the Mediterranean to dismantle the garrison at Tangier. This time Shovell, along with Wheeler and Aylmer, produced friction when they were clearly reluctant to sign the report justifying the destruction of the new mole at Tangier. After dismantling the garrison, Dartmouth returned to England, leaving Shovell in charge of a seven-ship squadron. He towed the Tangier pontoon to Cadiz and later cruised off Sale and the Strait of Gibraltar. 
Shovell returned to England at the end of 1686 and in April 1687 took command of the 62-gun 'Anne', flagship of the duke of Grafton. In her he escorted the queen of Portugal from Rotterdam to Lisbon and then returned to the Mediterranean to ensure that the treaty with Algiers was not broken, negotiating for the release of some English prisoners. In June 1687 he detained the 'James and Mary', commanded by William Phipps, to secure the silver plate Phipps had recovered from a wrecked galleon in the West Indies. 
In April 1688 Shovell took command of the 'Dover'. When William III sailed from the Netherlands in November, Shovell was assigned to Dartmouth's fleet, but was cruising independently until 9 November. A few days later Russell named Shovell as one of eight captains 'resolved to salute Dartmouth and come over to us' (BL, Egerton MS 2621). After William III accepted Dartmouth's profession of loyalty and ordered him with the main fleet to the Nore, William ordered the 'Dover' to remain with a dozen more vessels at Spithead under Sir John Berry. There, they served to guard against any French attack and to prevent any suspicious movements at Portsmouth. In particular, Shovell was assigned to take precautions against attempts to smuggle the infant prince of Wales to France. 
In mid-January 1689 the fleet was reorganized and Shovell joined the newly formed squadron under Commodore John Ashby. In April he took command of the 70-gun 'Edgar', assigned to Herbert's fleet, which was one of nineteen ships that engaged the French at Bantry Bay, on 1 May 1689. After the battle the fleet returned to Portsmouth, where the king knighted Shovell and Ashby on board the flagship of the newly created earl of Torrington at Portsmouth on 15 May. 
On 24 October Shovell shifted to command the 'Monk'. His initial assignment to join the West Indies squadron in her was scrapped and instead he commanded a small squadron cruising between the Isles of Scilly and Ireland. As early as January 1690 Shovell was marked for promotion to rear-admiral of the blue, but this did not take place until June, after it was clear that he had no role in a conspiracy in the fleet. In the spring of 1690 he saw action near Dublin and oversaw the transport of the army and its equipment to Ireland. As part of this movement, on 11 June the king embarked in the yacht 'Mary' (Captain Grenville Collins) at Hoylake and sailed to Carrickfergus, with 288 transports carrying 36,000 troops under Shovell's escort. On arrival William shifted to Shovell's barge to land. Occupied on this duty, Shovell was unavailable when the French fleet attacked Torrington off Beachy Head. 
On receiving news of the battle, the queen's council sent orders to Shovell and to Vice-Admiral Henry Killigrew, returning with his squadron from the Mediterranean, to join Torrington. Shovell immediately sailed for Plymouth, where he met up with Killigrew. In London, both Shovell and Killigrew were mentioned as possible candidates to be one of the joint admirals to succeed Torrington in command of the main fleet. In the course of this discussion, Queen Mary told the king that her advisers considered Shovell 'the best officer of his age' (Mary to William, 6/16 July 1690, 'CSP dom.', '1690-91', 53). The presence of the French fleet in the channel, however, prevented the detached squadrons from reinforcing the main fleet. In light of this, Shovell was ordered to cruise in the Soundings and guard against any French attempt to attack Ireland. On reports that French frigates were at Kinsale, he sailed there, where the enemy had just surrendered to English forces under Major-General Kirke. With Duncannon Castle still resisting, Shovell immediately ordered several frigates to bring about its reduction on 28 July. From there, he sailed for Plymouth, but was recalled to form a squadron to intercept a French squadron reportedly covering the evacuation of Galway and Limerick. Interrupted in this by other demands, Shovell was ordered by the Admiralty to sail for the Downs. Arriving on 10 October, he received new orders to take all available ships to Plymouth and to cruise for the protection of trade in the Soundings. He returned to the Downs in mid-January 1691 to join the fleet escorting the king to the Netherlands. At The Hague, on 17 February, the king appointed him major of the 1st marine regiment. Upon his return, he joined the main fleet under Russell. His early naval patron Sir John Narbrough had died in the West Indies in 1688, and on 10 March 1691 Shovell married his widow, Elizabeth, 'nee' Hill (1659-1732). 
In July 1691 Shovell was sent to get intelligence of the French fleet at Brest and proceeded close inshore, imitating a returning French fleet with English prizes. With this ruse, he seized several French merchant vessels loaded with money and ascertained that an unexpectedly powerful force of eighty-four ships of the line lay at Brest. At the end of the campaigning season ashore, he escorted the king from the Netherlands to Margate, where the king landed on 19 October. While still at the camp at Ath, the king additionally commissioned Shovell lieutenant-colonel of the 2nd marine regiment. In January 1692 Shovell was promoted rear-admiral of the red and in March again escorted the king back to the Netherlands. Afterwards he rejoined Herbert's fleet and was among the eighty ships with him on 19 May, when they encountered the French fleet off Barfleur. 
Shovell commanded the rear division of Herbert's centre squadron. At 11 a.m. the opposing fleets opened fire in light west-south-westerly winds at such close, musket-shot, range that Shovell later remarked he had never before seen two fleets engage at such short distance. After about two hours the wind shifted, giving Shovell the opportunity to luff up into the new breeze and break through the French line. Seven of his nine ships were able to follow his manoeuvre. The Dutch, in the allied van, made a similar tactical manoeuvre and forced the French to double back on their own line. When the fog cleared momentarily, Shovell engaged Tourville's flagship and six others, but the wind quickly died again and, as the tide turned and began to sweep the opposing fleets to the east, Tourville anchored. Shovell followed suit, but the opposing ships could only exchange fire from their stern and bow guns. Shovell immediately attempted to dislodge the French by sending down fireships on the tide. Shortly thereafter he faced nine French ships coming down the tide. In the face of this new threat, he cut his anchor cables and drifted past Tourville's squadron, which succeeded in heavily damaging Shovell's ships at close range. By ten in the evening the engagement had ended, but the larger English force had not destroyed the smaller French fleet. 
Shovell pursued the main body of the French fleet as it moved westward. About midnight the next day, with his flagship nearly disabled by the heavy fire it received, Shovell shifted his flag to the frigate 'Kent'. Continuing westward, he soon led the chase with ten ships. He came nearly within gunshot off Cherbourg on 21 May, but withheld fire, awaiting reinforcements. He followed the French to the roadstead of La Hogue and anchored offshore. The following morning Russell ordered him to attack, but he could not, without wind. At this point Shovell reported that he was suffering from a sudden and severe illness, probably blood poisoning from the splinter wound in the thigh received during the fleet action. Rooke took Shovell's place and carried on the attack. Shovell returned to the 'Royal William' and proceeded to Portsmouth for repair, later going on the Chatham Dockyard. He came ashore on 28 May to recuperate at Fareham. 
In late 1692 the dispute that had arisen between Russell and Nottingham over the conduct of the fleet developed into a party political battle in parliament as well as a conflict between Commons and Lords. As a result it became difficult to choose any one individual to command the fleet for the 1693 season. It was 23 January 1693 before three flag officers were appointed to jointly command the fleet. They were Killigrew and Delaval, two officers with tory political leanings, and Shovell, who was known as a whig. Shovell was the junior of the three and appointed admiral of the blue. On 27 April he joined his father-in-law, John Hill, as an extra commissioner of the Navy Board. 
On 15 May 1693 the joint admirals met and considered a plan to convoy a large number of merchantmen to the Mediterranean. Not knowing the exact location of the enemy fleet, the admirals waited until they could obtain more information. A few days later, at the queen's command, the Admiralty overruled this decision, whereupon the joint admirals decided to take the main fleet to accompany Rooke's convoy escort to a position 90 miles west-south-west of Ushant. There they planned to leave Rooke to proceed on his own. On reaching that position the joint admirals still had no information on the whereabouts of the French fleet and decided to stay with Rooke for an additional 60 miles. On 7 June the joint admirals turned to the north, thinking that the longer they stayed with Rooke, the more they were leaving England open to attack from Brest. Not knowing that the French fleet had sailed to the south, they had unwittingly left Rooke and his fleet to fall into the hands of the combined Brest-Toulon squadrons lying in wait at Lagos Bay on the south coast of Portugal. 
News of the disastrous attack on the Smyrna merchantmen reached London in mid-July 1693 and the joint admirals' entire conduct of the operation came under tumultuous parliamentary criticism. Although the joint admirals escaped censure, they were dismissed from their joint command and Russell was recalled to replace them and to serve as first lord of a newly reconstituted Admiralty board. 
Later, Shovell was named to command the squadron for the West Indies, but Francis Wheeler replaced him before it sailed. In 1694 he purchased an estate, May Place, at Crayford, Kent, and later that year returned to sea as vice-admiral of the red in the main fleet under Lord Berkeley. He participated in the expedition to Camaret Bay which carried the troops under Lieutenant-General Thomas Talmash and also included some of William Meester's 'machine vessels' (vessels of 20-100 tons filled with explosives; towed inshore just before a naval bombardment, they were detonated by a preset firing mechanism, the explosions signalling the main attack). In November Shovell was again the centre of attention. In the Downs, he ordered the 'Stirling Castle' to fire on the 56-gun Danish warship 'Gyldenlove', commanded by a future Danish admiral, Captain Niels Lauritzen Barfoed, for failing to strike her pendant in salute to the queen's flag in English home waters. 
In May 1695 Shovell was promoted and retroactively paid the allowance of his earlier rank as admiral of the blue from 1 January 1694. In 1695 he was in command of the 'Cambridge' as well as acting as Berkeley's second flag officer while in command in the attacks on St Malo and Dunkirk. In August he was spoken of for commanding a small Mediterranean squadron, but eventually Russell was sent with a full fleet of fifty-six ships. In December he took command of the 'Duchess'. In April 1696 he commanded the 'Victory' as well as being admiral of the blue at the bombardment of Calais. After he had operated in the Bay of Biscay in July and August, the Admiralty sent orders to Shovell to command the fleet in the Mediterranean, but when the French Toulon squadron slipped into Brest that plan was not put into effect. He commanded the Channel Fleet in the remainder of the war in 1697 and in March succeeded Lord Berkeley as colonel of the 2nd marine regiment. 
Shovell was appointed commander-in-chief of vessels in the Thames and Medway in August 1698, providing escort for the king on his return from the Netherlands in November. In the parliamentary election of 1698 he was returned as second member for Rochester and retained that seat until 1701. In March 1699 he exchanged his position as an extra commissioner to be one of the principal officers of the Navy Board as controller of victualling accounts. 
Shovell returned to command the Channel Fleet again in 1701. It was probably in the early months of Anne's reign that John Macky wrote his posthumously published note on Shovell: 'No man understands the Affairs of the Navy better, or is beloved of the Sailors so well as he. He loves the 'Constitution' of his 'Country' and serves it without 'factious aim'; he... proves a very grateful Husband... hath very good Natural Parts; familiar and plain in his Conversation; dresses without affectation; is a very large, fat, fair Man. ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 121)' 

Shortly after Anne's accession to the throne, Shovell was promoted admiral of the white (May 1702) and presided over the court martial of Rear-Admiral Sir John Munden. Then he returned to sea as second in command to Rooke. When Rooke sailed to attack Cadiz, he ordered Shovell to cruise in the Atlantic in search of the French naval squadron escorting the returning Spanish bullion fleet. Receiving news that it had arrived at Vigo, Shovell rushed to support Rooke, arriving four days after the initial attack. When Rooke left for home with the main fleet, he remained behind to manage the aftermath of the action, to repair and re-rig the captured vessels, and to supervise the care of disabled ships, destroying those that could not be taken to sea. In particular, he was ordered to prevent any embezzlement of prize goods. He completed this work and departed Vigo on 25 October, but was delayed in his return by bad weather. 
In early 1703 Shovell became one of the advisers to the newly formed ordnance establishment and was also present at the opening of the goods from Vigo and to make an account of them. That same year he commanded the squadron in the Mediterranean, where he first attempted to make contact with the Camisard rebels in the Cevennes, then sailed for Leghorn, where he arrived on 19 September. When he found that the Austrians had no plans for the fleet to support their military operations, he departed for England. 
A few days after his return, Shovell and several vessels had anchored at the Gunfleet on 27 November 1703 before proceeding up the Thames. Caught there by the great storm, his flagship, 'Triumph', broke her anchor and had her rudder torn off. Dragging her bower anchor and driving toward the Galloper sand, the ship was saved by Shovell when he ordered the main mast to be cut down. 
In early 1704, on reports that the Brest fleet had sailed to the Mediterranean, Shovell was ordered to take a large reinforcement of twenty-five ships to Rooke's assistance. Joining with Rooke on 16 June off Lagos Bay, he took part in the capture of Gibraltar, a place that he knew well from his earlier postings in the Mediterranean, and in the fleet battle off Velez-Malaga on 13 August. In September he returned to England with Rooke's fleet. On 25 December he left office as controller of victualling accounts and on 26 December 1704 became rear-admiral of England and a member of the lord high admiral's council. On 13 January 1705 he succeeded Rooke as admiral of the fleet. Later in the year he was returned as member of parliament in the first seat for Rochester. 
On 1 May 1705 the lord high admiral appointed Shovell and the earl of Peterborough joint admirals for an expedition to the Mediterranean to seize Toulon. The fleet of twenty-nine ships of the line sailed from St Helens on 23 May, and reached Lisbon on 11 June. The Toulon operation and other alternatives were set aside when, at the express desire of King Charles, the Austrian candidate for the Spanish throne, the fleet sailed to Barcelona. Peterborough landed with the troops without opposition on 12 August, accompanied by King Charles and the prince of Hesse-Darmstadt. After considerable debate between the Dutch, King Charles's court, Shovell, and Peterborough over the next step, they agreed to besiege Barcelona, which capitulated three weeks later, on 23 September. With no appropriate winter base in the Mediterranean, Shovell left Peterborough at Barcelona and returned to England. 
In 1706 Shovell embarked troops to make a false attack on Normandy, but, when bad weather prevented that attack, he proceeded to Portugal with the troops. The original plan was to land the forces in Portugal for an overland attack on Madrid, but an English council of war objected to the Portuguese plan to divide English forces between two armies. Declining this, Shovell landed them in February 1707 at Alicante. Ordering Sir George Byng to support operations, he returned to Lisbon to refit. Two months later he went to Barcelona where Byng, with Vice-Admiral Phillips van der Goes and the Dutch squadron, rejoined him on 20 May. There, Shovell was instrumental in persuading Charles III to implement the long-planned assault on Toulon. In July, near Toulon, Duke Victor Amadeus II of Savoy and Prince Eugene of Savoy consulted with Shovell on board his flagship, 'Association'. After Shovell agreed to keep ships available throughout the following winter, the commanders resolved to march the allied armies directly on Toulon. More than 100 cannon were landed from the fleet, and allied forces were in such force that the French sank many of their warships in Toulon harbour. The siege continued until 4 August, when French troops rallied. The allied generals decided they could not prevail. By 23 August the armies had dispersed and Shovell, deeply disappointed, sailed for Gibraltar. 
Continuing on with twenty-one ships in the main fleet, he reached the Soundings on the morning of 21 October. On the following day, while trying to confirm its position, the fleet lay to in hazy weather from early in the afternoon until nightfall, and Shovell detached three vessels for Plymouth, apparently thinking the fleet was further to the eastward than it was. Shortly after six, still unable to confirm his position, Shovell ordered the fleet to continue up the channel in fleet formation. At about eight, in dark and rainy weather, lookouts in several ships suddenly saw rocks and the loom of the St Agnes light. Several warning guns were fired, but before the flagship could manoeuvre she struck the Outer Gilstone Rock in the Isles of Scilly and sank quickly. Most of the nineteen vessels in the fleet escaped a similar fate, but the 54-gun 'Romney' was wrecked on the same rocks, while the 70-gun 'Eagle' sank off the Tearing Ledge, just south-east of the Bishop and Clerks rocks. Of the 1315 men in these three ships, there was only one survivor, a quartermaster from the 'Romney'. Shovell's body came ashore from the wreck on the south side of St Mary's Island at Porth Hellick Cove. The fact that he came ashore more than 6 miles from the wreck site, in close proximity to the bodies of his two stepsons -- Sir John Narbrough and James Narbrough -- a pet dog, and the flagship's captain, suggest that they had been able to leave the wreck together in a boat. Numerous legends and traditional stories surround these events. The most persistent is the alleged confession of a woman in the 1730s, who on her deathbed reported that she had found Shovell alive on the beach and, coveting the emerald ring on his finger, took his life. As her dying wish, the parish priest sent the ring to James, earl of Berkeley. In 1879 a similar ring was in the possession of the Berkeley family, but has not been traced since. 
The 'Salisbury' carried the body to Plymouth, where Dr James Younge embalmed it at the Naval Hospital, before it was taken by land to London. Shovell's death, with the loss of the 'Association' and her consorts, was a great national disaster and accompanied by a great outpouring of grief. The embalmed body lay in state at the queen's expense at Shovell's home in Frith Street, Soho. Two months after the accident, on 22 December 1707, it was borne in an elaborate hearse to Westminster Abbey, where he was buried in the south choir aisle, near the east cloister door. John Molesworth summarized Shovell's reputation when he wrote to his mother, on hearing the news of his death: 'He is universally regretted for his courage, capacity, and honesty, which it will be hard to parallel in another commander' ('Various Collections', 8.240). 
Shovell left his London house, an estate at Crayford, Kent, and a considerable fortune. Survived by his mother, who died in 1709, and his wife, who lived until April 1732, Shovell also left two daughters. The elder, Elizabeth (1692-1750), married Sir Robert Marsham (1685-1724), created Baron Romney in 1716. After his death she married John Carmichael, third earl of Hyndford, the English minister at Berlin (1741-4), St Petersburg (1744-9), and at The Hague, where she died in 1750. Shovell's second daughter, Anne (1696-1741), married, first, the Hon. Robert Mansell (died 1723), and, second, John Blackwood. 


@@@@@


doc= 25471


Shower, Sir Bartholomew (1658-1701), lawyer, was born on 14 December 1658 in Northgate Street, Exeter, Devon, the fourth of five children of William Shower, merchant, and his wife, Dorcas ('bap'. 1630), daughter of Exeter merchant John Anthony. Shower attended school in Exeter, and moved to London in 1675, where he initially resided at Newington Green. Shower was raised in a dissenting family. His uncle Mark Down (who baptized him on 26 December 1658) was one of the ministers ejected from his living as a result of the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662 and his brother John Shower was a prominent Presbyterian preacher. Shower was admitted to the Middle Temple on 9 September 1676, called to the bar on 21 May 1680, named king's counsel on 14 February 1688, and called to the bench on 25 May 1688. He was a reader at the Middle Temple for the autumn term 1691 and was elected its treasurer on 27 October 1699. Shower later said that he joined the Church of England when he was aged eighteen, but he seemed to retain some dissenting sympathies, advocating greater freedom for dissenting academies and defending the 'Toleration Act', though he did criticize occasional conformity. In 1699 he prepared a bill against prostitution and adultery, perhaps reflecting his brother John's passionate interest in the reformation of manners. 
In some sketchy autobiographical notes published by Butt, Shower indicated that he married on 21 January 1682, but he did not name his wife, nor did he identify her in his will, which left a life estate to 'my dear and loving wife'. The will, written only months before his death, mentioned no children of his own, though it bequeathed some property to his nephew Bartholomew and to his niece Dorcas. 
Shower first gained public notice with his tract 'An Antidote Against Poison' (1683), which vehemently attacked Lord Russell's purported scaffold speech that protested his innocence. Shower was appointed deputy recorder of London on 14 April 1686 and in that capacity he achieved notoriety by sentencing four soldiers to death for desertion, despite the known doubts of the recorder, Holt, that desertion constituted a capital crime in peacetime. Shower was knighted on 14 May 1687 upon presenting James II with an address from the Middlesex grand jury that thanked him for the declaration of indulgence. Shower was appointed recorder of London on 6 February 1688, but was removed later that year following the restoration of London's charter. He was also one of the prosecutors of the seven bishops, though in a subordinate role. 
As a supporter of James II, Shower fell out of political favour with the revolution of 1688, but he remained active in both law and politics. He published no fewer than three tracts in 1689, defending his earlier work against Lord Russell from attacks by Sir Robert Atkyns and others, though Shower now emphasized the integrity of the prosecution and called for a general amnesty. In 1692 he published 'A Reason for a New Bill of Rights', in which he advocated a more specific bill of rights, especially the enactment of the recently unsuccessful 'Trials for Treason Bill'. Shower collaborated with high-church tories, providing the initial idea for Francis Atterbury's 'Letter to a Convocation Man' (1697), and he published a bitter attack on Dean William Sherlock regarding the Bingham affair (1696). 
Although he was born into a fairly prosperous mercantile family, Shower later remarked that he had been poor as a young lawyer. Be that as it may, his law practice flourished, enabling him to buy a house in Chelsea in 1691 and subsequently to purchase estates in Middlesex at Pinner, Ruislip, and Northolt. Shower represented a number of prominent Jacobite and tory clients throughout the 1690s, such as the Scottish Lord Preston in 1691; several of the conspirators in the assassination plot against William III, among them Sir John Fenwick in 1696; and Charles Duncombe and the old East India Company, both in 1698. He also represented Sir Edward Seymour in his suit against Captain Kirke, and Bishop Watson against efforts to deprive him of the bishopric of St David's. 
On 29 August 1698 Shower was sworn in as a freeman of Exeter and as one of its counsels. Later that year he and Seymour were chosen as that city's members for parliament by a larger than expected majority. He was re-elected in 1700 and again in 1701. Shower quickly became one of the leading tory spokesmen in the Commons, supporting the 'Disbanding Bill' (1698), attacking the whig ministry over the grant to Captain Kidd (1699), and speaking at length against the Kentish petition (1701). He also served as one of the Commons' managers of the impeachment against the Junto Lords. On 17 June 1701 he was elected as one of the seven commissioners of accounts, and he was at least mentioned as a candidate for both attorney-general and speaker. His early death cut short a promising political career. 
Eleven works of Shower's, on law and politics, were published, some posthumously. He was the first to publish (in 1698) the judicial decisions of the House of Lords, but the printing ceased when the Lords voted the publication a breach of privilege. Two volumes of Shower's law reports were posthumously published from his manuscript notes. These reports have been much criticized, but both Wallace and Holdsworth note that Shower had not prepared them for publication. George Butt brought out a third edition of Shower's 'Reports' (1834), correcting numerous transcription errors in the two earlier editions and adding the reports for the Michaelmas term of 1688, but curiously it was the second edition of 1794 that was reprinted in 'The English Reports' (vol. 89, 1908) and hence is usually cited. Shower became suddenly ill at Temple Church on Sunday 30 November 1701, and he died four days later, on 4 December, from pleurisy at his home in Temple Lane. He was buried on 12 December 1701 at Pinner, where there is a monument to him in the chapel. 
An avid and active partisan, Shower was a controversial figure in his day. The country whig Sir Richard Cocks called him 'the littlest maliciousest man living' ('Diary of Sir Richard Cocks', 73), but the tory newspaper 'Post Boy', in an unusually long and fulsome obituary, lauded his generosity, 'great veracity', and 'sprightly way of pleading' ('Post Boy', nos. 1023, 1025). Such differing opinions continued into the nineteenth century: to Macaulay, Shower was a 'base and hard-hearted pettifogger' (Macaulay, 5.360), while Butt claimed Shower was 'the most accomplished lawyer of his time', save Holt (Shower, xi). The more distant twentieth century has tended to regard Shower more dispassionately as an inveterate tory and a skilful lawyer. 


@@@@@


doc= 25472


Shower, John (bap. 1657, d. 1715), Presbyterian minister, was born in the parish of St Kerrian, Exeter, and was baptized there on 18 May 1657, the second son of William Shower (died 1661), a wealthy Exeter merchant, and his wife, Dorcas Anthony ('bap'. 1630), daughter of John Anthony. Sir Bartholomew Shower (1658-1701), recorder of London, was a younger brother. Shower's father died in 1661 but left his wife and children well provided for. Shower was encouraged in his studies by his mother and by his uncle Richard Down, who, following his ejection from the rectory of Winterborne Monkton, Dorset, became pastor to a congregationalist meeting at Bridport. He attended the school run at Exeter by Mr Bradford before entering, in 1671, the academy of Matthew Warren at Otterford, Somerset, with a view to entering the ministry. It was probably here that he acquired his belief in the free and critical study of the scriptures. Shower went on to study at Charles Morton's academy at Newington Green, Middlesex (where his fellow pupils were Daniel Defoe and Timothy Cruso), and completed his course of ministerial training at Edward Veal's academy in Wapping. 
At the age of twenty, in 1677, Shower delivered his maiden sermon at Thomas Vincent's meeting-house in Hand Alley, Bishopsgate, London. His reputation as a preacher grew, and in the following year he became one of a group of evening preachers (who also included Theophilus Dorrington) at a merchant's lecture set up in the large room of a coffee house in Exchange Alley. He was ordained on 24 December 1679 by five ejected ministers, headed by Richard Adams. He at once became (while still retaining his lectureship) assistant to Vincent Alsop in Tothill Street, Westminster. In 1681 Shower published his first work, by far his most enduring and popular, 'An Exhortation to Youth to Prepare for Judgement' (1681). This had reached its sixth edition by the time of his death thirty-four years later; the twentieth and last edition was published in 1826. 
In 1683 Shower relinquished his posts when the whig politician Sir Samuel Barnardiston sent him abroad with two other young ministers as companions to his nephew Samuel Barnardiston. They made the grand tour, visiting France, Switzerland, Italy, and the Rhine. At Amsterdam in July 1684 they parted. Shower remained in the Netherlands until 1686. Having returned to England, he resumed his lecture at Exchange Alley, but the extreme pressure to which nonconformists were then subjected led him to return to the Netherlands in late 1686 or early 1687. He joined his fellow London Presbyterian minister John Howe at Utrecht. There he met and married, on 24 September 1687, Elizabeth Falkener (died 1691), niece of the merchant and whig politician Thomas Papillon, and a fellow exile. They had three children but only the eldest, Ann, survived beyond infancy. At the end of 1687 Shower and his wife moved to Rotterdam, where for three years he served as evening lecturer in the Presbyterian Church of England, of which Joseph Hill was a pastor. 
Shower returned to London upon receiving a call (19 January 1691) to succeed Daniel Williams as John Howe's assistant at Silver Street. Shower remained there for only a few months; on 8 May 1691 he accepted the call to replace Samuel Borfett as minister of the Presbyterian meeting at Curriers' Hall, Cripplegate. He retained this charge until his death, having been 'married' to his flock by Matthew Mead, as Edmund Calamy put it ('DNB'). His wife died later the same year, on 24 August. His funeral oration for her was published the following year under the title 'The Mourning for the Dead'. On 29 December 1692 he married Constance White (died 1701), daughter of an eminent London merchant. They had several children, but only three, Martha, Bartholomew, and John, survived their father. 
The congregation at Curriers' Hall grew in numbers and in 1692 was obliged to move to more commodious accommodation in Jewin Street, where, his funeral sermon recorded, he 'continued his work in a very zealous, lively manner, with great diligence and remarkable success' (Tong, 63). When this also proved too small for the growing congregation a new meeting-house was erected in the Old Jewry in 1701, the required funds being raised by the merchants and shopkeepers who made up the congregation. Here Shower had one of the 'most considerable assemblies about the city' (ibid., 68), and Timothy Rogers and Joseph Bennet were successively appointed as his assistants. 
Shower was elected a manager of the Common Fund in 1692, and was retained when, following the breakdown of relations with the Independents, it was reconstituted as the Presbyterian Fund in 1695. He was a member of a club of ministers in which Edmund Calamy was the leading spirit; for some years from 1692 it held weekly meetings at the house of Dr Upton in Warwick Lane. In 1697 Shower succeeded Samuel Annesley as one of the Tuesday lecturers at Salters' Hall. 
Shower was a prolific writer of religious works, and the author of over twenty publications. Most of these were funeral sermons (he had the reputation of an emotional preacher), such as those for Mrs Mary Doolittle (1693), Nathaniel Oldfield (1697), Jane Papillon (1698), and Nehemiah Grew (1712). In 1693 he published a historical and providentialist account of earthquakes, 'Practical Reflections on the Late Earthquakes', stimulated by the destruction of Port Royal, Jamaica, the previous year. Among his other works were 'Some Account of the Holy Life and Death of Mr Henry Gearing' (1694), 'Winter Meditations' (1695), and 'Serious Reflections on Time and Eternity' (1696). 
Shortly after his move to Old Jewry, Shower's wife died in childbed on 18 July 1701, and on 7 December 1707 Ann, the daughter of his first marriage, suffered the same fate. Shower himself almost died in 1706, when 'seized by a very malignant fever' (Pike, 110). He never fully recovered and became increasingly frail, though John Fox, who visited him in 1712, was impressed by his 'state and pride' ('DNB'). On 14 September 1713 he suffered a stroke, and though he was able to preach again, he delivered his last sermon at Old Jewry on 27 March 1715. Less than three months later, on 12 June, he was 'seized with a nervous asthma' (Tong, 74). He died at his home in Stoke Newington, Middlesex, on 28 June, and was buried at Highgate on 7 July. His funeral sermon was preached by William Tong at the Old Jewry on 10 July 1715. 


@@@@@


doc= 25473


Shrapnel, Henry (1761-1842), army officer and inventor of the Shrapnel shell, was born on 3 June 1761, the youngest son of the nine children of Zachariah Shrapnel (1724-1796) from Midway Manor House, Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire, and his wife, Lydia ('nee' Needham). The family name appears as Shrapnell in a number of contemporary sources, including Wellington's dispatches and editions of the 'Army List'. Shrapnel was commissioned into the Royal Artillery on 9 July 1779; he served in Newfoundland from 1780 to 1784, and advanced to first lieutenant on 3 December 1781. After returning to England in 1785 he began to develop, at his own expense, an explosive shell capable of being fired from existing artillery pieces; the device was in the form of a hollow spherical case, filled with small, round shot and a charge of powder, which was ignited by a fuse of variable length inserted in the base of the shell. The released shot, he hoped, would lethally spray the enemy. Before his experiments had been completed he served in Gibraltar (1787-91), where he was encouraged to find that mortar shells had been fired from 24-pounder guns over Spanish positions in the recent siege with similar intent and some success. Then, for two years, Shrapnel served in the West Indies, successively at Barbados, St Vincent, Grenada, Dominica, Antigua, and St Kitts. 
Shrapnel was promoted captain lieutenant on 15 August 1793, and eleven days later he left England with the third Royal Artillery detachment to join the duke of York's expeditionary force in Flanders; he was wounded at the unsuccessful siege of Dunkirk in September. During the British withdrawal from there Shrapnel recommended that the wheels of gun-carriages be locked, so that they skidded over the sand, and that decoy fires be lit at night away from the army's true bivouac position to attract harmless enemy fire. He remained with the British force as it fell back towards Bremen, reaching Woolwich again on 8 May 1795. Shrapnel was promoted captain on 3 October 1795, brevet major on 29 April 1802, regimental major on 1 November 1803, and regimental lieutenant-colonel on 20 July 1804. Meanwhile he had resumed work on his invention, still at his own expense and in his own time. In 1799 he submitted a proposal to the Board of Ordnance that it be adopted for use in the army; this was eventually approved in 1803. Shrapnel became the first assistant inspector of artillery at Woolwich on 10 February 1804, with wide responsibility for ordnance research and development in addition to shells. Thus, in January 1807, he recommended to Lieutenant-General Sir Arthur Wellesley (later Viscount Wellington) new, large-calibre siege-guns from the Carron works in Scotland. 
Shrapnel's shell received favourable reports after its use during the capture of Surinam in April-May 1804; and in the light of operational experience further technical improvements were made to enhance its performance. In 1808 Wellesley wrote approvingly of its worth during his first campaign in Portugal; though he argued that for security reasons its novel nature should not be publicly revealed. This, he acknowledged, would deprive Shrapnel of overt recognition, but the 'ingenuity and the science which he has proved he possesses by the great perfection to which he has brought this invention' ('DNB') should in itself be sufficient reward. Wellesley confirmed to Shrapnel that his shell had been most effective in the battle of Vimeiro (21 August 1808); and, in another personal letter, Lieutenant-Colonel William Robe, commanding the Royal Artillery in the Peninsula, emphasized that its 'dreadful' impact had been noted 'by the French and all our own general officers, in a way highly flattering to us' ('DNB'). Captain H. B. Lane described to Shrapnel the 'immense slaughter the enemy sustained' (Duncan, 2.277) from his shells at Busaco on 27 September 1810, an outcome confirmed separately by Major J. May. However, after his initial enthusiasm Wellington told the earl of Liverpool on 12 March 1812 that his opinion in favour of the shells had lately been much shaken. He believed that difficulty in judging distance meant that fuse lengths were incorrectly set and seldom readjusted. Furthermore the wounds inflicted were 'of a trifling description; and they kill nobody'; he likened their effect to that of 'duck shot', which accidentally hit 'the face of a person' and could be easily plucked out ('Dispatches', 8.659). Three weeks later, on 3 April 1812, Wellington revoked his extreme criticism, acknowledging that 'the spherical case shot called Shrapnell's ['sic'] shells' had been 'very destructive of the enemy' at the siege of Badajoz. Nevertheless he had directed that some shells in future be loaded with 'musket balls' to counteract the fact that the wounds currently inflicted 'do not disable' ('Dispatches', 9.28). In further letters to Shrapnel from the Peninsula on 9 May 1813 and 22 October 1814, Major A. Macdonald and Lieutenant J. Sinclair described how devastating the shells had proved against exposed French field batteries at Salamanca. Three days after the victory at Waterloo, Colonel George Wood, the artillery commander, underlined his approval of the shell to its inventor. Nor was the Royal Navy unimpressed. In 1813 Vice-Admiral Sidney Smith, following correspondence with Shrapnel, privately ordered 200 shells directly from the Carron works to compensate for a shortfall in official supplies. 
Shrapnel married on 5 May 1810 Esther Squires (1780-1852) at St Mary's Church, Lambeth, in the bride's parish; they had two sons and two daughters. Shrapnel was promoted brevet colonel on 4 June 1813, and regimental colonel on 20 December 1814. He complained to the Board of Ordnance on 10 September 1813 that he had spent several thousand pounds of his own money over twenty-eight years to develop his shell, but the board replied that it had 'no funds at their ['sic'] disposal for the reward of merit'. In 1814, however, a pension of $1200 p.a. for life was granted by the government, in addition to his service pay and allowances. In fact the award was deemed to apply to all his inventive work, not just the spherical case-shot. Furthermore a narrow, bureaucratic interpretation of the terms of the award ensured that, in reality, he enjoyed scant financial gain. 
Shrapnel advanced to major-general on 12 August 1819, and retired from active service on 29 July 1825. Nevertheless he did not stop experimenting, and in 1834 patented a percussion lock for small arms. Indeed, in addition to this and his shell, Shrapnel compiled invaluable artillery range tables, invented the brass tangent slide, and improved the efficiency of mortars and howitzers by the introduction of parabolic chambers. He is credited with devising a duplex disappearing mounting for two pieces of ordnance, so that the recoil of one gun lowered it under cover as the second was raised into a firing position. Important advances in small arms, ammunition, and fuses were also ascribed to him during his time at Woolwich. He was appointed a colonel-commandant of the Royal Artillery on 6 March 1827, and became lieutenant-general on 10 January 1837. Shortly afterwards, at Brighton, he was a guest of William IV, who extolled the virtues of his achievements. On 23 April his private secretary wrote to Shrapnel, intimating that the king intended to bestow a baronetcy on him. William IV died in June, and nothing more was heard on the subject. 
On 13 March 1842 Shrapnel died at his residence, Peartree House, Southampton; he was buried in the family vault at Bradford-on-Avon church, Wiltshire. Several military figures, including Major-General William Nott and Lieutenant-General Sir Hugh Gough, expressed their high regard for Shrapnel to his eldest son, Henry Needham Scrope (1812-1896), who later submitted unsuccessful claims to the government and to parliament for further recompense for his father's inventions, given that the special pension had terminated with his death. The generic term 'shrapnel', widely used to describe fragments of metal from explosives, has perpetuated Henry Shrapnel's name and until the end of the First World War shells were still being manufactured according to his original principles. 


@@@@@


doc= 25474


Shrubsole, William (1729-1797), Independent minister and mastmaker, was born at Sandwich, Kent, on 7 April 1729 and baptized at St Clement's, Sandwich, on 18 April, the son of Edward Shrubsole and Mary Chapman, who had married on 1 July 1726. In February 1743 he was apprenticed to George Cook, a shipwright at Sheerness, whose daughter Margaret (died in or after 1796) he married in 1757. He was converted to a religious and godly life by reading a work of Isaac Ambrose, and in 1752 he was asked to lead the small Independent congregation at Sheerness on Sunday afternoons. In 1763 the congregation erected a meeting-house, and Shrubsole frequently acted as their minister. About 1767 he began regular public preaching in Sheerness and other towns in Kent. In 1773 he was appointed master-mastmaker at Woolwich but later in the year he was promoted at Sheerness. There, in 1784, a new chapel was built for him, which was enlarged in 1787. In 1793 he had a paralytic stroke and a co-pastor was appointed. 
Shrubsole's most popular work was 'Christian Memoirs' (1776), an allegorical work in the style of Bunyan, featuring representations of John Wesley and George Whitefield; the countess of Huntingdon was among the subscribers. The book was written, as Shrubsole explains, to divert his mind after being bitten by a mad dog in 1773. A second edition (1790) contained an elegy written in 1771 on the death of Whitefield; a third edition (1807) was edited by his son, with a life of the author. Shrubsole also published a pamphlet arguing for increased pay for shipwrights (1770) and wrote on infant baptism (1794). With Samuel Denne he was the author of 'The History and Antiquities of Rochester' (1772). He died at Sheerness on 7 February 1797 and was survived by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 25475


Shrubsole, William (bap. 1760, d. 1806), organist, the youngest son of Thomas Shrubsole, a farrier, was born at Canterbury and baptized on 13 January 1760. He was a chorister in the cathedral from 1770 to 1777, and organist at Bangor Cathedral from 1782 to 1784, when he was dismissed for frequenting conventicles. He then became organist of Spa Fields Chapel, Clerkenwell, London, a post he held until his death. He was a successful teacher in London, and among his pupils were William Russell (1777-1813), the organist of the Foundling Chapel, and Benjamin Jacob, of Surrey Chapel. The 1794 musical directory describes him as an alto singer, and in that capacity he is said to have performed at Drury Lane and Westminster Abbey. Shrubsole composed the famous hymn tune known as 'Miles Lane', set to the hymn 'All hail! the power of Jesus' name', by Edward Perronet. 'Miles Lane' was first published anonymously in the 'Gospel Magazine' in November 1779, and then under Shrubsole's name in S. Addington's 'Collection of Psalm Tunes' (1780). Shrubsole became intimate with Perronet at Canterbury, and Perronet, besides making him one of his executors, left him a substantial share of his property in 1792. Shrubsole died in London on 18 January 1806 and was buried at Bunhill Fields. The first strain of 'Miles Lane' was engraved on his tombstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 25476


William Shrubsole (1759-1829), bank clerk and hymn writer, who was born at Sheerness on 21 November 1759. He became a shipwright in Sheerness Dockyard and later an officer's clerk. In 1785 he went to London as a clerk in the Bank of England, and eventually he was appointed secretary to the committee of Treasury. He was one of the first secretaries of the London Missionary Society and contributed to the Religious Tract Society ['see 'Founders of the London Missionary Society]. He published hymns in various religious publications from 1775 to 1813. His best-known hymn, 'Arm of the Lord! awake, awake' (1795), is attributed in some works to his father. His hymn 'Bright as the sun's meridian blaze' was written in 1795 for the London Missionary Society. Shrubsole, who had a daughter, Mrs Cunliffe, died at Highbury on 23 August 1829 and was buried in Bunhill Fields. He was not connected with William Shrubsole ('bap'. 1760, died 1806), the composer and organist. 


@@@@@


doc= 25477


Shuckard, William Edward (1802/3-1868), entomologist, was the eldest son of Johann Leonhardt Schuckardt of Frankfurt am Main, Germany, who settled in England in 1787 and married in 1793. Johann Schuckardt Anglicized his name to Leonard Shuckard, and about 1802 leased the Old Ship (then Brighton's principal hotel), in partnership with Alexander Hicks. 
William Shuckard was well educated, and then placed in the house of Baldwin, Craddock, and Joy, publishers, of Paternoster Row, London. He lodged first with his maternal uncle, William Bernard Cooke (1778-1855) ['see under 'Cooke family (per. c.1800-1865)], a line engraver of Soho Square. However, Shuckard's fondness for 'midnight readings' led to friction with his uncle (and the resultant oversleeping led to several threats of dismissal from work). Shuckard moved from his uncle's house and for some time lodged instead at Bateman's Buildings, Holborn, but continued neglect of his duties led to his dismissal. He returned to live with his father at Brighton, where it was hoped he would start up as a bookseller. His father was also keen for him to gain some experience of the German book trade, and sent Shuckard to a firm of booksellers, possibly at Frankfurt or Leipzig. 
On 19 November 1829 at St Pancras Old Church, Shuckard married Sarah Ann, daughter of Mr Martin of Horsted Keynes, Sussex. From about 1832 Shuckard attempted to move into writing, and took on occasional sub-editing duties at a local Brighton newspaper. His leisure hours were devoted to entomology, and he soon became an expert in the study. He was a member of the Entomological Society's publications committee, and on 2 April 1835 was appointed librarian to the Royal Society. He held the latter post until 9 November 1843, when he was dismissed for being insolvent, the result of 'the too strenuous pursuit of the science of entomology and the publication upon it' (MC 3.310, Royal Society). 
In 1844, through the influence of the entomologist William Wilson Saunders (1809-1879), Shuckard obtained the post of editor of 'Lloyds List', which he held until his retirement in 1861. In that same year, Shuckard borrowed a large number of insects from the Entomological Society, the East India House, and his fellow entomologists Frederick William Hope and John Obadiah Westwood. However, at some later stage, financial difficulties led to Shuckard's pawning the borrowed specimens, and subsequently being unable to buy them back. As a result, Westwood had to re-purchase both his own insects and those belonging to Hope. 
Despite being dogged by financial troubles Shuckard saw a number of works into print, including 'Essay on the Indigenous Fossorial Hymenoptera' (1837); 'Elements of British Entomology' (1839); 'The British Coleoptera Delineated', with drawings by William Spry (1840); 'On the history and natural arrangement of insects', in Lardner's 'Cabinet Cyclopaedia', 10 (1840), written in conjunction with William Swainson; 'Catalogues of the miscellaneous manuscripts and of the manuscript letters in the possession of the Royal Society' (1840); and 'British Bees' (1866). 
Shuckard also produced a number of works that were translations of German originals. They included 'A Manual of Entomology, from the German of Dr Hermann Burmeister' (1836); 'Travels in the East' (1847), from the work by Tischendorf; and 'Chamber and Cage Birds' (1848), a translation of Johann Bechstein's work, which went through many editions. Some sixteen papers on entomological subjects were also written by him, and appeared in various scientific journals between 1836 and 1842. He died on 10 November 1868 at the Oval Road, Kennington, and was survived by at least one son. 


@@@@@


doc= 25478


Shuckburgh, Sir Richard (1596-1656), royalist army officer and antiquary, was the second son of John Shuckburgh (died 1631), gentleman, of Shuckburgh, Warwickshire, and his wife, Margery (died 1629), eldest daughter of Richard Middlemore of Edgbaston, Warwickshire. He was educated at Lincoln College, Oxford, and graduated BA on 3 May 1615. On the death of his childless elder brother, John, in 1625 he became heir to the family estates. On 30 November 1627 he married Mary Crompton, the widowed daughter of Ralph Sneyd of Keele, Staffordshire. Mary died childless on 5 September 1629 and on 10 December 1630 Shuckburgh married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Robert Lee of Billesley, Warwickshire. Shuckburgh's father died in 1631 and his second wife two years later, leaving him an eligible, childless widower. On 4 February 1634 he married Grace (died 1677), daughter of Thomas Holte of Aston, one of the foremost landowners in Warwickshire. In 1635 a son, John, was born. 
In 1635 Shuckburgh was appointed to the Warwickshire bench and in 1640 he secured the second Warwickshire seat in the Long Parliament. Despite his kinship with the Middlemores, a prominent Catholic family, he was a convinced Calvinist and co-operated fully with the Long Parliament's anti-papist actions. On the outbreak of civil war he attempted to maintain a neutral stance. He was imprisoned by the House of Commons in September 1642, but bailed the following month and returned to Warwickshire. By tradition he was hunting on his estates when he encountered Charles I on the march to Edgecot and was personally enlisted by the king. In October 1642 he was present at Edgehill, where he was knighted. According to the family tradition he returned to Shuckburgh after the battle and defended the house unsuccessfully but with great bravery against a parliamentarian force. He was sequestered and imprisoned for a time, but benefited from the influence of powerful friends. When his case was discussed by the county committee, the earl of Denbigh was reported to have 'excused his going to the king and said it might be to do good offices' ('CSP dom.', '1649-50', 444-5). He was acquitted by the sequestration committee at Westminster in March 1647 and survived a further attempt to convict him of royalism in November 1651. 
In his retirement Shuckburgh interested himself in history and antiquities, assisting with the research for William Dugdale's 'Antiquities of Warwickshire'. Thomas Fuller dedicated to him the third section of the fifth book of the seventeenth century of his 'Church History'. Shuckburgh died in London on 13 June 1656 and was buried at the church of St John the Baptist, Upper Shuckburgh. He and Grace had four surviving sons and two daughters. His heir, John, married Catherine, daughter of Sir Hatton Fermor of Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, in December 1656, and was created a baronet in 1660 in recognition of the service of his father and maternal grandfather to Charles I. Shuckburgh's wife survived him and subsequently married John Keating, chief justice of the common pleas in Ireland. She died in Dublin in April 1677. 


@@@@@


doc= 25479


Evelyn, Sir George Augustus William Shuckburgh, sixth baronet (1751-1804), mathematician, was born George Augustus William Shuckburgh on 23 August 1751, the eldest son of Richard Shuckburgh (1728-1772) of Limerick and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Captain John Hayward RN, of Plumstead, Kent, and widow of Edward Bate. Sir Richard Shuckburgh (1596-1656) was his direct ancestor. Shuckburgh was educated at Rugby School from June 1760 until he entered Balliol College, Oxford, in April 1768, graduating BA in 1772. On the death of his uncle, Sir Charles Shuckburgh, fifth baronet, on 10 August 1773, he succeeded to the baronetcy and the family estates at Shuckburgh, Warwickshire. He was elected to the Royal Society in December 1774, by which time he had already departed on a tour of Europe. 
The weather diary which Shuckburgh maintained during this period shows that he spent the winter of 1774-5 in Amiens, the following summer in Paris, then travelled via Lyons, where he was admitted to the Academie des Sciences, Belles-Lettres et Arts, and reached Geneva in July 1775. Shuckburgh was particularly interested in the heights of the Alps, and in the structure and quality of the atmosphere. He took with him on his travels two fine travelling barometers by Ramsden, from which he could ascertain his altitude, also small hygrometers and an anemometer. From Geneva he went to Chamonix to explore its glacier, and continued over the Alps via Turin and Bologna to Florence, where he stayed for the rest of the winter. In the summer of 1776 he toured the Italian cities as far south as Rome, before returning to Paris, thence to London, which he reached in September 1776. 
After his grand tour Shuckburgh frequently travelled within Britain, and occupied himself with various scientific experiments. He was elected to the Society of Antiquaries in 1777, and was among the medical and political membership of the Eumelean Club, which met in a tavern in Bond Street, Westminster. On 27 September 1780 he was returned to parliament for the county of Warwick, and retained the seat until his death. He mostly supported Pitt and Fox; one of the few subjects on which he spoke in the house was applied mathematics, on which he presented several papers to the Royal Society. In 1790 he was one of the committee that declined the petition of Thomas Mudge who was seeking a reward for his chronometer, and he spoke on the debate in 1793. In February 1796 he actively supported the public purchase of John Hunter's museum, which was given into the care of the Royal College of Surgeons. 
Shuckburgh's first marriage, on 3 July 1782 to Sarah Johanna (1755-1783), daughter of John Darker, merchant and MP for Leicester, was brief; on 10 April 1783 she died at Bristol where she had gone to take the medicinal waters. His second marriage, on 6 October 1785 at St Margaret's, Westminster, was to Julia Annabella (1757-1797), daughter of James Evelyn of Felbridge, Surrey. Their only child, Julia Evelyn Medley Shuckburgh, was born in her father's town house, in Park Street, Westminster. 
The painstaking barometric measurements made by Shuckburgh and General William Roy in Savoy, concerning the heights of mountains, were published in 1777. Shuckburgh also toured Wales in 1779, taking barometric readings at the foot and summit of Snowdon. Astronomy was another of his interests; his observatory at Shuckburgh was equipped with an equatorial telescope and other instruments by Jesse Ramsden. From 1780 Shuckburgh began to consider how best to set up a universal measure of length, such that if the physical standard should be destroyed, the measure could be reconstructed from first principles. He devoted much time to determination of standards of length, capacity, and weight. In contrast to similar work being undertaken in France, where the metre was taken as one part in ten million of the distance between pole and equator along a great circle, Shuckburgh chose to derive the yard by reference to the length of a pendulum beating seconds. He procured the apparatus which John Whitehurst had constructed before his death, and obtained a chronometer from Arnold, and from the instrument maker Edward Troughton a 5 foot standard, fitted with reading microscopes, and a precision beam balance. The microscopes allowed a far more accurate measurement than the beam-compasses used hitherto, and did not need to be in contact with the standard. In the event, Whitehurst's apparatus was unequal to the task, but with the aid of Whitehurst's data, and comparisons with existing standards dating from the reign of Henry VII, Shuckburgh achieved his aim. For this work, the Royal Society awarded him its Copley medal. 
The condition of inheritance following the death of his father-in-law in 1793 required Shuckburgh to adopt the name of Evelyn, which he took by private act of 1794, being henceforth known as Shuckburgh Evelyn. Another private bill dealt with enclosure of his lands, possibly in connection with the construction of a canal through this area. He died at Shuckburgh Park on 11 August 1804 and was buried on 20 August at Shuckburgh church, alongside his wives. His daughter married in 1810 Charles Cecil Cope, third and last earl of Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 25480


Shuckford, Samuel (1693/4-1754), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Norwich, the son of Samuel Shuckford, landowner, of Palgrave in Suffolk. He was educated at the grammar schools of Norwich and of Botesdale in Suffolk. In 1712, aged eighteen, he was admitted as a scholar to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA (1716) and MA (1720); he subsequently obtained the Lambeth degree of DD. He was ordained deacon on 16 June 1717 and priest on 28 October of the following year. In 1722 he was presented to the rectory of Shelton in Norfolk, resigning in 1746. This he held with the living of Hardwick, as well as being vicar of Seething and Mundham, all Norfolk parishes. On 21 March 1738 he was instituted to the tenth prebend in Canterbury Cathedral. Subsequently he obtained the living of All Saints, Lombard Street, London, and it is said that between 1732 and 1754 he served as a chaplain to George II. 
Shuckford was the author of 'The Sacred and Profane History of the World' (1728), which he intended to serve as an introduction to Henry Prideaux's 'Historical Connection of the Old and New Testament'. It was subsequently reprinted on several occasions between 1731 and 1808, and in 1810 there appeared a new edition by Adam Clarke, printed with Shuckford's 1753 treatise, 'The Creation and Fall of Man'. Shuckford died in London on 14 July 1754 and was buried in Canterbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 25481


Shuldham, Molyneux, Baron Shuldham (1717/18?-1798), naval officer and politician, was the second son of the Revd Samuel Shuldham of Dublin and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Daniel Molyneux of Ballymurray, co. Longford. He entered the navy in 1732 as captain's servant in the 'Cornwall', with Captain George Forbes (later the earl of Granard). He afterwards served in the 'Solebay' with Captain Charles Fanshawe, and for upwards of four years in the 'Falkland' with Fitzroy Henry Lee. He passed his lieutenant's examination on 25 January 1739, being then described on his certificate as 'near twenty-two'. 
On 31 August 1739 Shuldham was promoted lieutenant of the 'Tilbury', one of the ships which went to the West Indies with Sir Chaloner Ogle, and in 1741 he took part in the unsuccessful attack on Cartagena. In 1742 he was the 'Tilbury''s first lieutenant when, on 21 September, she was set on fire in a drunken squabble between a marine and the purser's boy and burnt, with a large proportion of the ship's company. Shuldham, with the captain and other officers, was tried by court martial on 15 October, but was acquitted of all blame. As commander of the bomb-vessel 'Blast', Shuldham fought with considerable gallantry to prevent her, ultimately unsuccessfully, from being taken by two Spanish privateers in the West Indies (19 October 1745). In recognition of his efforts he was on 12 May 1746 promoted captain of the frigate 'Sheerness', then employed on the coast of Scotland (BL, Add. MS 15956, fol. 191). In December 1748 he was appointed to the 'Queenborough', and in March 1749 to the 'Unicorn'. In October 1754 he was appointed to the 'Seaford', from which, in March 1755, he was moved to the 'Warwick' (60 guns), going to the West Indies, where, near Martinique on 11 March 1756, she fell in with a French 74-gun ship and two frigates, which overpowered and captured her. War had not then been declared, but hostilities had been going on for several months. Shuldham, with the crew of the 'Warwick', was sent to France, kept a prisoner at large at Poitiers for nearly two years, and returned to England in a cartel on 16 March 1758. A second court martial acquitted him of all blame for the loss of the ship. 
On 25 July 1758 Shuldham was appointed to the 'Panther', in which he joined Commodore John Moore in the West Indies and took part in the reduction of Guadeloupe and its dependent islands from March to May 1759. In July he was moved by Moore into the 'Raisonnable', which was lost on a reef of rocks at Fort Royal off Martinique as she was standing in to engage a battery on 8 January 1762, when the island was attacked and reduced by Rear-Admiral George Rodney. In April Rodney appointed Shuldham to the 'Marlborough', from which a few days later he was moved by Sir George Pocock to the 'Rochester', and again by Rodney after a few weeks to the 'Foudroyant', in which he returned to England in 1763. In December 1766 he was appointed to the 'Cornwall' guardship at Plymouth, and in November 1770 to the 'Royal Oak', then commissioned in readiness for the expected conflict with Spain. On 14 February 1772 he was appointed commodore, governor, and commander-in-chief on the Newfoundland station, which office he held for three years, and on 31 March 1775 he was promoted rear-admiral of the white. 
Meanwhile in 1774 Shuldham was elected MP for Fowey, Cornwall, and became a loyal supporter of the North ministry. On 29 September 1775 he was appointed commander-in-chief on the coast of North America from the St Lawrence River to Cape Florida. He went to Boston with his flag in the 'Chatham' (50 guns), arriving there on 30 December after a passage of sixty-one days. On 5 February 1776 he was promoted vice-admiral of the blue. His work was limited to covering the operations of the troops, and preventing the colonial trade, a task far beyond his resources. In June 1776 he was superseded by Lord Howe. Both Sandwich and the king sympathized with Shuldham and he was given an Irish peerage as Baron Shuldham (31 July 1776). That he was a brave and capable officer is well attested. 
Early in 1777 Shuldham returned to England, and from 1778 to 1783 he was port-admiral at Plymouth. He was promoted admiral of the blue on 24 September 1787 and admiral of the white on 1 February 1793. On 4 October 1790 he married Margaret Irene, daughter of John Sarney of Somerset House, London, and widow of John Harcourt of Ankerwyke, Buckinghamshire; the couple had no children. He died at Lisbon in the autumn of 1798, whereupon the title became extinct. Shuldham's body was brought home from Lisbon in the same ship (the 'Colossus') as Sir William Hamilton's famous collection of Greek vases. The ship was wrecked in the Scillies and, though many of the vases were lost, Shuldham's body was recovered by heroic efforts. 


@@@@@


doc= 25482


Shute, Christopher (d. 1626), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was probably a younger son of Christopher Shute of Oakington, Cambridgeshire, and younger brother of Robert Shute (d. 1590), the future judge, who was born at Gargrave, Yorkshire. He matriculated as a pensioner from Pembroke College, Cambridge, in the Michaelmas term of 1561, graduated BA early in 1565, and proceeded MA in 1568. 'Hand-picked' (Collinson, 208) by Archbishop Edmund Grindal, who had been master of the college when he was first an undergraduate, Shute was ordained at York in August 1572 and licensed to preach throughout the diocese and province. On the presentation of the queen, but probably through the influence of either Grindal or George Clifford, earl of Cumberland, the local magnate, Shute was on 15 July 1576 instituted vicar of Giggleswick, Yorkshire. 
The following year Shute published the first edition of his catechism, 'The Testimonie of a True Fayth', and 'A verie godlie and necessary sermon preached before the young countess of Cumberland... the 24 of November 1577'. The latter stressed obedience to the word of God and Christian assurance, and called for right administration of the sacraments and for ecclesiastical discipline. Shute proceeded BD in 1580, and in 1581 issued a new version of his catechism as 'A Compendius Forme and Summe of Christian Doctrine'. Its dedication to the earl of Cumberland acknowledged his patronage and emphasized the role of the Christian magistrate. 
Shute was, or became, one of Cumberland's wealthier tenants in the lordship of Craven. On 17 August 1581 at Giggleswick he married Katherine Newhouse. They had at least five sons -- Robert ('bap'. 1584), Nathaniel ['see below'], Josias Shute (bap. 1588, d. 1643), Thomas ['see below'], and Timothy ['see below'] -- and two daughters, Margaret and Mary. 
Shute was almost certainly the author of 'A Brief Resolution of a Right Religion, Touching the Controversies that are nowe in England' (1590). He explained to his readers that 'I shall hazard my person in running uppon the cragged rockes of the pestilent toonged papistes... howbeit I mean well even to the Romish Catholickes themselves'. In his dedication to Francis Flower, esquire and JP, the publisher John Proctor declared that, of all those tackling the subject, 'none... so largelie, and in such sweet maner deciphered true religion before, wherein contrarie sects are utterly put down, altogether making manifest what true faith is'. The work contained a further commendation from 'R. Armin'. 
Shute was emerging as the pre-eminent leader of a flourishing and sometimes radical puritan tradition in Craven. As early as 1582 a Kirkby Malhamdale man had been presented before the northern court of high commission for misbehaving during one of his sermons, 'sayinge that it was a shame for him to tarry so longe in the pulpytt' (Marchant, 278). Ten years later, in 1592, records of a case of defamation brought before the same court reveal him as a participant in 'exercises' at Gargrave. In 1594 Shute himself became a member of high commission, yet the same year was presented for not using the cross in baptism and then, following his compliance on this point, for other nonconformist practices. However, such trouble as he experienced over the affair seems to have arisen from a quarrel with some parishioners: that he remained a commissioner and that the court's sole requirement was that he should preach a sermon approving the 'Book of Common Prayer' is testimony both to the strength of puritanism and its patrons in the area and to the authorities' perception of the imperative for providing an effective preaching and pastoral ministry. In 1599 Shute was nominated a member of the commission for the investigation of schism in the northern province. 
By the end of the century Shute was acting as the chairman of the governors of Giggleswick School, and in that capacity he began in 1599 to keep minutes of their meetings, preserved at the school in the 'Shute book'. At least three of his sons were pupils there, and between 1615 and 1619, probably as a temporary expedient, Shute also served as headmaster. He died at Giggleswick shortly after making his will on 9 October 1626, and was buried there on 14 October. His wife survived him, but was dead by 1 May 1628, when her will was proved. 
All five of Shute's sons entered the ministry, a fact noted and celebrated by David Lloyd in his memoir of Josias. Robert, of whom little is known, was vicar of Lyn and predeceased his father. 




@@@@@


doc= 25483


Shute, John (d. 1563), writer on architecture, was probably born in Cullompton, Devon. A painter-stainer by training, he is presumably the 'John Shute paynter' whose new house in Grantham Lane, London, is referred to in a deed dated 6 December 1550. In 1561 Shute was paid $12 for making the Merchant Taylors' Company's pageant at the lord mayor's show. He may also be identified with the limner, or miniature portrait painter, named as Shoote in Richard Haydocke's 'A Tracte Containing the Artes of Curious Paintinge Carvinge & Buildinge' (1598, 126). But nothing else is known of his professional life, and no paintings have been attributed to him. 
By Shute's own account, it was as a servant of John Dudley, first duke of Northumberland, that he was sent to Italy in 1550 'ther to confer with the doinges of the skilful maisters in architectur, & also to view such auncient Monumentes hereof as are yet extant' (Shute, dedication). His itinerary certainly included a stay in Rome, and he returned to England with drawings of buildings, sculptures, and paintings. Northumberland showed these to Edward VI, but it was not until 1563 -- ten years after Northumberland's death -- that Shute published 'The first and chief groundes of architecture used in all the auncient and famous monymentes: with a farther & more ample discouse uppon the same, than hitherto hath been set out by any other'. Dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, it was the first architectural treatise published in Britain, and the first in the English language. A licence for printing it in London was granted to Thomas Marshe some time between 20 March and 22 July 1563. The title-page description of Shute as a 'Paynter and Archytecte' need not imply that he ever practised architecture. 

'The First and Chief Groundes' is principally concerned with the origins and proportions of the five classical orders of architecture (Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, and Composite), as established in a similar treatise by the Italian architect Sebastiano Serlio ('Regole generali di architetura', 1537). Shute relates each of these to the personification of an appropriate Greek deity. He also describes a sixth order, the Attic, citing Vitruvius, Pliny the elder, and the arch of Septimius Severus and the Pantheon in Rome, and throughout the treatise develops fresh interpretations of his subject, based on reading and observation. The text is illustrated with original woodcuts and metalcuts after Shute's own designs; if he executed the latter, which is plausible, he is the first English-born engraver whose name is known. 
Scholars are divided as to the influence of Shute's treatise. He himself confessed that his subject was 'knit unto all the Mathematicalles' (Shute, preface): thus he was forced to introduce unfamiliar terminology into the English language, which would have made his text difficult to comprehend. There is hardly any surviving evidence that his designs were imitated: pilasters at Kimbolton Castle and Kirby Hall were copied from the title-page border design, but this woodcut was almost certainly not drawn by Shute. Only the Roman Doric order of the nearly contemporary screen at Middle Temple Hall has been positively linked to Shute's illustrations. On the other hand, his book was directed at a wide range of artisans besides architects, and it was popular enough to be abridged for a new edition dated 1587. There is good evidence to suggest that it was also reprinted or reissued in 1580 and 1584, although no copies of these printings can now be traced. Shute intended to publish more on architecture, but he died in the year 'The First and Chief Groundes' was published. He was buried in the church of St Edmund, King and Martyr, Lombard Street, London. A verse epitaph giving his date of death as 25 September 1563 was recorded before its destruction in the great fire. 


@@@@@


doc= 25484


Shute, John (fl. 1557-1598), translator and soldier, is of unknown origins. His first translation from the Italian, 'Two very notable commentaries, the one of the originall of the Turcks and empire of the house of Ottomano, written by Andrew Cambini and the other of the warres of the Turke against George Scanderbeg, prince of Epiro' was published in 1562. It was dedicated to his singular good lord and master Sir Edward Fynes, Lord Clinton, high admiral of England and Ireland. This suggests that he was the Captain John Shute who was included in the list of names of the lords and gentlemen who attended Clinton to France in 1557. Clinton became governor of the Tower of London in 1553 and Shute was made a gunner of the Tower of London and yeoman of the ordnance for life in 1569. In his dedicatory epistle to Clinton, Shute promotes the idea that a trained, skilful, and fit soldier was better than an untrained man. Shute uses examples from classical literature to reinforce this. He apologizes to the reader for the roughness of the translation, as he had not been brought up in schools. He added a table of contents and marginalia to the original. 
Shute's 'The firste parte of the Christian instruction and generall some of the doctrine, conteyned in holy scriptures', translated from the French of Peter Viret and published in 1565, was dedicated to the earl of Leicester by 'a simple solider, better practised abroad in martial arts than furnished at home with the cunning of the school'. A continuation of 'Christian Instruction' was translated and published in 1573 dedicated to Clinton's wife, Elizabeth, countess of Lincoln. Another translation of a work by Viret, 'The principal points which at this day are in controversie concerning the holy supper of Jesus Christ, and the mass of the Roman Church' (1579), was dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham. Shute had been connected with Walsingham from December 1573 to January 1574 when he travelled to Lowestoft in Suffolk to view soldiers returned from Holland with captains Bingen and Morgan, for which he was paid $10. During the Armada scare of 1587-8 Shute raised 2000 footmen and 200 horse from Surrey and Sussex, receiving $20 for this. He had retired from the post of yeoman of the ordnance by 1600 as a letter from his successor dated in that year says that as a yeoman Shute had refused to conduct the ordnance from place to place on the grounds that he was a leader of men not of carts. Shute had been given a pension by Bishop Horne of Winchester. In 1598 Shute had to write to Sir Robert Cecil to ask for his intercession in getting the pension paid. When Cecil had arranged this Shute wrote him a note of thanks. This is Shute's last appearance in the records. 


@@@@@


doc= 25485


Shute, Josias (bap. 1588, d. 1643), Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 11 August 1588 in Giggleswick, Yorkshire, the fifth of the nine children of Christopher Shute (d. 1626), vicar of Giggleswick, and his wife, Katherine Newhouse. He was educated at the free school in Giggleswick, and in 1602 matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1605 and proceeded MA in 1609. He was ordained priest on 3 June 1610, and on 30 November the next year was instituted to the rectory of St Mary Woolnoth, London, where he remained until his death. On 25 April 1614 he married Elizabeth Glanvild, one of his parishioners, whom he later described in his will as 'my truly loving and dear wife'; they had no children. 
Shute was one of the most widely respected preachers of his day: John Hacket styled him 'Generalis Praedicatorum', the preacher-general of the City of London. According to Ephraim Udall, in the 1645 edition of Shute's 'Judgement and Mercy', he preached 'thrice a weeke ordinarily, and often upon other occasions', and habitually rose from bed at 4 a.m., spending the day 'pinned in his chair to his study and to his bookes, being not willing to be troubled'. None of his sermons was printed during his lifetime, although he bequeathed 'all my paper books and writings' to his brother Timothy Shute ['see under 'Shute, Christopher], perhaps with a view to posthumous publication. Such was his popularity, however, that notes from his sermons were frequently taken down by members of the audience, and some of these later found their way into print. Notes from his sermons on 'Exodus' 4: 21-7, probably preached about 1628-9, are preserved in the British Library (Add. MS 14900), and nine sermons on 'Exodus' 8: 1-10, evidently part of the same series, were published under the title 'Judgement and Mercy' (1645). Excerpts from another course of sermons on the book of 'Ezra' were published as 'Divine Cordials Delivered in Ten Sermons' (1644) from the shorthand notes of one William Reynolds, but the sole authorized edition of any of Shute's sermons was 'Sarah and Hagar' (1649), a series of nineteen sermons on 'Genesis' chapter 16, 'published according to his own original manuscripts, circumspectly examined and faithfully transcribed' by Edward Sparke, rector of St Martin Pomeroy, Ironmonger Lane, London. Shute was also much in demand as a preacher to the East India Company: in September 1633 he preached 'a sermon of thanksgiving to Almighty God for returning their ships and estates in safety' in which he protested against the recent reduction in mariners' wages ('CSP col.', 8.457, 468). 
Shute was later described as one of those divines 'whose standing in the gap, when superstition was rushing in, drew upon them that venerable nickname of Puritans', and this was said to be the reason why he received no preferment until April 1642, not long before his death, when he was appointed archdeacon of Colchester. However, he was equally firm in his opposition to religious radicalism, and the same account describes him as 'so earnest a lover of union and right devotion that the dividing Separatist and superstitious Papist received a wound from him at every Lecture' ('An elegiacall Commemoration'). In November 1642 he was ordered to be imprisoned for refusing to contribute to the support of parliament, but it is not clear whether he was actually sent to prison: according to Robert Chestlin, he was merely 'molested, and vext to death, and denyed a Funerall Sermon to be preached by Dr Holdsworth as he desired', while another account states that he continued preaching until three months before his death, and then retired to the country house of one of his parishioners, a few miles out of London. His last recorded sermon, probably preached in 1642 or 1643, warns that 'Reformation must not bee by Faction and Tumult', and complains: 'The Impudency of some new preachers now, and the Ignorance of others, will foole us out of our Religion' (CUL, MS Dd.5.31, fol. 136). In 1643 he was appointed a member of the Westminster assembly, but did not live to attend it. He died on 13 June 1643, and was buried in the chancel of St Mary Woolnoth on 14 June, when several thousand people attended his funeral. His will bequeathed the sum of $5 per annum to the governors of Giggleswick School to establish a university exhibition there. His wife outlived him by nearly thirty years, dying on 11 June 1670 at the age of over a hundred. 


@@@@@


doc= 25486


Shute, Robert (d. 1590), judge, was born at Gargrave in Yorkshire but his father, Christopher Shute, resided at Oakington, Cambridgeshire, and it was there that Robert made his home. Cooper said he was probably educated at Christ's College, Cambridge, perhaps because it was his son's college, though he is more likely the Shutte admitted as a scholar of Peterhouse in 1542 or 1544. What is known for certain is that he studied at Barnard's Inn in the late 1540s before being admitted to Gray's Inn in 1550. He was doubtless patronized by his neighbour Sir John Hynde, justice of the common pleas and former bencher of Gray's Inn, whose widow left Shute $4 a year in 1555, 'towardes his fyndynge at the innes of court' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/37, fol. 262). By 1557 he was an ancient of Gray's Inn, and the following year the borough of Cambridge elected him as their recorder in succession to George Freville. He made a Latin oration to the queen when she visited Cambridge in 1564, and represented Cambridge in the parliaments of 1571 and 1572-81. In November 1577 he was created serjeant-at-law, his patrons being Lord Burghley and Lord North, and gave a double reading in Gray's Inn as serjeant-elect. 
Shute's appointment as second baron of the exchequer on 1 June 1579 made a new departure. Until then the junior barons had never been serjeants and therefore did not go on circuit as assize judges, associate with the judges of the coif in the serjeants' inns (except by invitation), or wear full judicial robes with linings. After Shute the barons were always serjeants and became full members of the higher judiciary. Shute's patent gave him 'the same order, rank, estimation, dignity, and pre-eminence' as the puisne justices of the benches, and an increased stipend of $80, though parity of stipend with the other courts was not reached until 1645. On 8 February 1585 Shute was translated to the queen's bench, with arrears of salary from the death of his predecessor, William Ayloffe, in November 1584. On his deathbed, on 14 April 1590, he said to his wife, Thomasine, 'Thou haste ben a good wife to me and I have ben true to the, and I do give the all my worldlie goodes' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/75, fol. 236). This nuncupative will was proved on 5 May. Thomasine was the daughter of Christopher Burgoyne of Long Stanton, Cambridgeshire. She was the judge's only wife, and they had at least eight children. The eldest son, Francis, settled at Upton, Leicestershire, and was the ancestor of John Shute Barrington, first Viscount Barrington (1678-1734). Shute was probably buried at Oakington. 
Shute's fourth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 25487


Robert Shute (d. 1621), matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1598, and graduated bachelor of arts in 1601-2. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1600 and called to the bar in 1605. He seems to have lived a disreputable life; he became heavily in debt, and was outlawed seventeen times. Attaching himself to George Villiers, the future duke of Buckingham, he secured through his influence the chief clerkship of the king's bench (jointly with Robert Heath) in 1616, under a settlement by John Roper, first Lord Teynham, against the wishes of Sir Edward Coke. On the death of Richard Martin in 1618, Shute became the court candidate for the recordership of London, but was refused on account of his past and Heath was elected instead. In 1620 Shute's reputation underwent a change. During Lent he delivered a reading in Gray's Inn, where he had been a bencher since 1617, and on 29 December he was returned to parliament for St Albans. John Lewis dedicated 'Ignis coelestis' to him the same year. The recordership becoming vacant again on Heath's appointment as solicitor-general, Shute was elected on 20 January 1621, the king remarking that, although there was formerly some colour for the objections against him, 'there was none now, besides which he hath since been reader of that society, whereby he hath given public satisfaction of his worth and ability in that profession' (Overall, 294, 303). However, he died within a few days of achieving his ambition, before 10 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 25488


Shute, Samuel (1662-1742), colonial governor and army officer, was born on 12 January 1662, the son of Benjamin Shute and Patience, the daughter of Joseph Caryl, clergyman and ejected minister. Shute was educated initially by Charles Morton, Puritan minister, was admitted to the Middle Temple on 23 November 1683, then to Christ's College, Cambridge (leaving without taking a degree), and finally to the University of Leiden. He preferred a military career, however, serving as a captain in Marlborough's European campaigns. He was wounded at the battle of Blenheim (1704) and ultimately rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the 3rd dragoon guards. 
As a reward for his service Shute became governor of Massachusetts in 1716. He landed in Boston that October, and found himself embroiled in the factional struggles that remained from the administration of his predecessor, Joseph Dudley. Dudley and his son Paul favoured the issuance of paper currency by the government, whereas the popular party, headed by Elisha Cooke, had proposed a privately run land bank. Dudley had won the Massachusetts assembly's support on this issue, and Shute continued his policies. 
Cooke, who speculated heavily in Maine lands, retaliated in 1718 by charging that John Bridger, the surveyor of the king's woods, had been collecting bribes that allowed some people to cut down trees reserved for the Royal Navy while preventing others from engaging in legitimate lumbering. Shute backed Bridger while Cooke persuaded the assembly his cause was just. The governor removed Cooke as clerk of the superior court and refused to allow his election to the provincial council in 1718. In defiance the house elected Cooke speaker in 1719, a choice Shute vetoed. 
Shute had little peace for the rest of his administration. The assembly cut his salary by twenty per cent, refused to provide presents for the Abenaki Indians in Maine, and then declined to vote funds to fight them when war subsequently broke out. A drunken Cooke accosted him on the street and called him a blockhead. Instead of dealing with a minor Indian menace his successor easily handled, Shute and the assembly debated that body's power to adjourn without the governor's consent and argued constantly for the last three years of his administration. 
Shute suddenly left for England on 1 January 1723, after someone took a pot shot at him in his home, narrowly missing him. He was followed by Cooke, who joined province agent Jeremiah Dummer in debating the same two issues of the house's right to self-adjournment and independently to elect its speaker. Finally, in 1726, the crown forced the Massachusetts legislature to accept an explanatory charter which gave the governor the right to veto the house speaker and only allowed the house to adjourn for two days, or over the weekend, without the governor's permission. 
Although Shute was vindicated he was in no hurry to return to Massachusetts. When George I died in 1727, and all royal commissions were thus vacated, the ministry replaced Shute with William Burnet, who would continue to argue with the Massachusetts assembly over the limits of its privileges. Shute tried in vain to recover his unpaid salary from the Massachusetts legislature, but was placated with a royal pension of $400 per year. He retired to private life, and died on 15 April 1742 while living in Westminster. He probably never married, for his will left several hundred pounds to nephews, nieces, a sister, and to several dissenting church charities in equal proportion, without mention of a wife or children. 
Shute is a prime exemplar of the many military men sent by Britain to govern the colonies in the hopes that their experience could discipline the unruly provincials. But in time of peace there was little incentive for a colony to co-operate with British desires to curtail the liberties which the local legislatures claimed. Shute had begun as a friend of the colonies, thinking his dissenting connections would make his rule easy. He soon learned that he had no choice but to assert his prerogatives fruitlessly or capitulate to the wishes of his constituents. 


@@@@@


doc= 25489


Shuter, Edward (1728?-1776), actor and singer, may have been born in 1728 but, as with so much else regarding the early life of this most colourful of actors, this is conjectural. Contemporary accounts such as the 'Theatrical Biography' (1772) say that he was the son of a chair-man and an oyster woman and was born in a cellar in Covent Garden, whereas Shuter said: 'my Mother sold Oysters in the Winter, and Cucumbers in the Summer, yet I do solemnly aver, that I was not born in a Cellar, but in a front room up two pairs of stairs, at one Mr. Merit's, an eminent Chimney-Sweeper, in Vine-street, St. Gile's. (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA')' It is possible that his father was Edward Shuter, the son of Francis and Mary Shuter, born on 18 May 1699 and baptized at St Anne's, Westminster, on 28 May. 
The majority of accounts refer to Shuter working as a pot-boy in taverns in and about Covent Garden, where he made acquaintance with actors by delivering beer to the theatres. It is likely that his informal connection with the stage began in 1741, when he was associated with John Frederick Lampe and his wife, Isabella, the actor James Worsdale, and the actor-manager Thomas Chapman, who formed a company to perform Lampe's operas in Preston and Chester. Shuter was seen by the young Charles Burney, who recorded: 'young Shuter, who had attended Mr & Mrs Lampe as a footboy in Preston, and who now served them in that capacity at the Golden Falcon at Chester... was such a pickle, and contrived to mount the stage in the absence of Worsdale, and took him off so exactly that he rec'd even more applause than Worsdale. (C. Burney, 'Fragments of an autobiography', BL, Add. MS 48345)' Shuter's more formal introduction to the stage evidently occurred at this time through Chapman, who managed the summer theatre in Richmond, Surrey, from 1730 through to 1747. Chapman acted in the patent theatres during the winter, ran a billiard room in Bow Street, and taught acting. The Richmond Theatre playbill of 8 September 1744 announces 'Master Shuter' as the Cook in Henry Carey's 'Chrononhotonthologos', but, according to a memorial notice in the 'Town and Country Magazine' (November 1776), it is likely that he continued his tavern life by working as a 'billiard marker'. 
Shuter first appeared at Covent Garden Theatre for Chapman's benefit on 15 April 1745 -- billed as one who had 'never appeared on the stage before' -- playing the title role in the afterpiece 'The Schoolboy', by Colley Cibber. On 13 June 1746 Chapman played Laertes to David Garrick's Hamlet with Shuter taking the part of Osric. He concluded the season at Covent Garden on 27 June by appearing as one of the witches to Garrick's Macbeth before accompanying Chapman for the summer to Richmond. He played a recruit in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer', Daniel in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers', Clencher in Farquhar's 'The Constant Couple', and Gage in John Crowne's 'Sir Courtly Nice', and was given two benefit nights, one in Richmond and one in Twickenham. Shuter spent the 1746-7 season at the illegal Goodman's Fields Theatre, where he began in earnest to compile his portfolio of roles. Among thirty which he played were Sir Jasper in Henry Fielding's 'The Mock Doctor', Taylor in John Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband', Filch in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', Syringe in Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse', Dr Caius in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Brazen in 'The Recruiting Officer', Flash and Fribble in Garrick's 'Miss in her Teens', and Polonius in 'Hamlet'. 
When Goodman's Fields was closed down after the 1746-7 season Shuter joined Samuel Foote in his attempt to evade the 1737 'Stage Licensing Act'. Foote hired the Haymarket Theatre and offered, for 2 April 1747, 'a Concert of Music. With which will be given Gratis a New Entertainment, call'd 'The Diversions of a Morning''. Foote's ruse failed to deceive, and Shuter returned to Richmond. 
Shuter's comic skills must have pleased Garrick, who engaged him when he took over Drury Lane Theatre in 1747. Shuter played there until 1753 (with an unexplained absence during 1748-9) and spent his summers at Richmond and Twickenham. Garrick's prompter, Richard Cross, notes both his rising popularity as a comic actor and also his developing reputation for exchanging comment with his audience. He notes that, when Shuter played Perriwinkle in Susannah Centlivre's 'A Bold Stroke for a Wife': 'At ye end of ye play, a voice call'd out to Shuter; Perriwinkle -- which he answer'd -- what do you want? This set ye audience in such a roar, that they insisted upon his giving out ye play, wch he did with great Applause, this wch would have been call'd Impudence in another was look'd upon, in him, as Humour; so rising is he in opinion. (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA')' At Covent Garden the manager, John Rich, had developed a reputation for spectacle, music, and pantomime, and Shuter's popularity in these areas caused his move to the theatre in 1753-4. With the exception of occasional benefit performances at Drury Lane, he remained at Covent Garden for the winter seasons until his last performance during 1775-6. But, like most actors of the eighteenth century, he spent the summer months in the provinces. He was in Dublin and Cork for the summer of 1760 and during 1762 he returned to Richmond. In 1763 he appeared again in Dublin and in Norwich. The Haymarket Theatre now enjoyed a summer licence, and Shuter appeared there during 1765, 1766, and 1767. He was at Bristol in 1768 and again in 1769. By the early 1770s his reputation for farce and audience involvement made him an attractive 'guest' playing his favourite parts on many of the provincial touring circuits. In this way he visited Edinburgh in 1773, then joined Tate Wilkinson's company based at York and Charles Mate's company at Canterbury. He made his last provincial foray in 1775 to Liverpool and York. 
Shuter's comic and ribald talents also drew him to the entertainment booths of Southwark and Bartholomew fairs. In September 1757 he advertised: 'This day at noon, Mr Yates of Drury Lane and Mr Shuter of Covent Garden Theatres at the new erected Great Concert Hall, the Greyhound Inn, Smithfield, intend to divert the Town... with a variety of Entertainments'. The 'Daily Advertiser' for 3 September 1757 states: 'the bold Shuter' would 'review his Troop... attended by Mammamawks, Papapawks, and Tomahawks... The Lords may laugh, the Ladies may laugh, and the Commoners may laugh... and that will make me laugh'. Shuter continued to present at fairs in 1760 and 1761, offering to give 'a new Exhilaration to Mirth, and dilate the Sides of Laughter, make Vice bleed under corrective Lash, and give a Lecture that shall Stimulate Virtue to pursue the Road to Happiness'. 
Shuter played a range of parts, all following distinctive 'lines' of business -- farcical servants, country boys, ageing squires, old beaux, comical judges, and assorted eccentrics, including burlesque women's parts. Typical of his range are Old Sly in Cibber's 'Love's Last Shift', Clincher Junior in 'The Constant Couple', Sir Amourous La Foole in Ben Jonson's 'Epicoene, or, The Silent Woman', Sir Callaghan O'Brallaghan in Charles Macklin's 'Love a la Mode', and Lady Pentweazle in Foote's 'Taste'. His Shakespearian roles included Dogberry in 'Much Ado about Nothing', Touchstone in 'As You Like It', Feste in 'Twelfth Night', Stephano in 'The Tempest', and, probably his most remembered role, Falstaff in '1 Henry IV'. Shuter should be remembered for giving the first performances in two of the century's great plays: Hardcastle in Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer', on 15 March 1773, and Sir Anthony Absolute in Sheridan's 'The Rivals', on 17 January 1775. His final performance, as Falstaff, was for his benefit at Covent Garden on 10 May 1776. He returned for Mrs Gardiner's benefit to perform Scrub and to speak the epilogue from the back of a donkey on 23 September 1776. 
Shuter's lack of education, his indolence, and his contractual carelessness, coupled with a predilection for hot gin, reduced his performing capacity and led to dissolution and illness. The actor John Moody wrote to Garrick from Liverpool in the summer of 1775: 'Shuter is a deplorable object!... He is profligate and wicked; he has been but once on the stage these last six weeks' ('Letters', 1026). But William Parsons was unstinting in his praise: 'to see Corbachio [in Ben Jonson's 'Volpone'] acted to perfection, you should have seen Shuter; the public are pleased to think that I act the part well, but his acting was as far superior to mine, as Mount Vesuvius is to a rushlight' (Kelly, 159). His unpredictability was loved, and he clearly represented that vein of comic observation and easy delivery that his theatre admired. Francis Gentleman, in 'The Dramatic Censor' (1770), describes his Harry Sycamore in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'The Maid of the Mill' (1765) as 'a talkative, vain, ignorant baronet, well calculated for Mr SHUTER, who exhibits him with whimsical pleasantry'; however, 'he seems too sensible of his own humour, and palpably chuckles where he should leave that totally to the audience'. He warns Shuter of a: '
swift-approaching age, 

When lost to action, he must quit the stage... Avert the storm, in time; lay by some pence; 

They'll yield thee comfort, and proclaim thy sense. 

' Doran's summary is revealing and credible: 'his life was one of intense professional labour, with much jollification, thoughtlessness, embarrassment, gay philosophy, hard drinking, and addiction to religion, as it was expounded by Whitfield.... Of all the frequenters of Whitfield's tabernacle in Tottenham Court road, there was no more liberal giver than the shattered, trembling, laughing, hoping, fearing, despairing -- in short, much perplexed actor and man who oscillated between Covent Garden stage and the Tabernacle pulpit, and meditated over his pipe and bottle in Drury Lane upon the infinite varieties of life. (Doran and Lowe, 2.335-6)' He had never married, but from about 1758 he engaged in a widely reported liaison with the dancer Nancy Dawson (1730?-1767). Shuter died at his lodgings in Windmill Street on 1 November 1776 and was buried five days later in St Paul's, Covent Garden, leaving, as far as is known, no will. 


@@@@@


doc= 25490


Shuttlewood, John (1632-1689), clergyman, ejected minister, and nonconformist tutor, was born on 3 January 1632 at Wymeswold, Leicestershire, the son of William Shuttlewood of Wymeswold. After attending grammar school in Leicester he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1650, and elected a scholar in 1651. He married Elizabeth ('c'.1635-1705), daughter of Humphrey Carter of Draycot, Derbyshire, on 26 April 1652. Having been approved by the Wirksworth classis, Shuttlewood was ordained on 26 April 1654 as the minister of Ravenstone, Derbyshire, apparently in the place of Samuel Hacksup. Shuttlewood appears to have held the rectory with the perpetual curacy of Hugglescote in Leicestershire. An English translation of his confession of faith, given originally in Latin, was published in Samuel Palmer's 'Nonconformist's Memorial'. 
As an intruding minister Shuttlewood was displaced from Ravenstone in 1660 on the return of Hacksup, the sequestrated minister, and presumably ejected from Hugglescote on his refusal to conform in 1662. By 1669 he had retired to Stoke Golding, a parish on the Warwickshire border near Hinckley in Leicestershire. He was an active nonconformist minister and was reported in the 1669 conventicle returns as preaching in eight parishes around Hinckley, Market Harborough, and Lutterworth in south-west Leicestershire, generally with Matthew Clarke, another ejected minister. He was cited in the archdeaconry court for taking part in the burial of Samuel Hall, a nonconformist gentleman, in Sibson church, in defiance of the 'Act of Uniformity'. Shuttlewood was to be considerably troubled by informers, in particular Charles Gibbons, a quarter-master in the trained bands. In December 1668 thirty or forty horsemen with drawn swords surprised Shuttlewood and many others at a meeting, during the singing of a psalm. Taken before William Street, a county magistrate, Shuttlewood was sent to prison on refusing to promise that he would attend his parish church the following Sunday, despite his never having been charged with being absent from church. He remained in prison until 24 February. Soon after the second 'Conventicle Act' came into force Gibbons surprised him and six or seven others at a house in Theddingworth. Although Gibbons would not swear to its being a conventicle, the men were convicted upon notorious evidence, and Shuttlewood was distrained $20 as the preacher. In May 1672 he obtained a licence under Charles II's declaration of indulgence to preach as a presbyterian at his own house in Lubenham, near Market Harborough. Despite the licence Gibbons took him before a justice, who at first refused to act but subsequently issued warrants. In February 1674 Gibbons interrupted another meeting at Shuttlewood's house in Lubenham, and, though appointed to appear before the justices, those present were never summoned but were distrained none the less. Gibbons's death in December 1675, after falling in a ditch and drowning when returning home drunk, removed Shuttlewood's worst tormentor, but he still found it necessary to make frequent moves to avoid arrest and finally moved to Northamptonshire. Edward Pearse, in his 'Conformist's Fourth Plea' (1683), included details of Shuttlewood's sufferings. In a letter to Richard Baxter, Pearse also provided an account of Shuttlewood's attempts to gather meetings at Little Creaton, where he lived, and Welford, in Northamptonshire, shortly after James II issued in his indulgence in 1687. 
Shuttlewood conducted one of the earliest nonconformist academies, preparing candidates for the ministry at Sulby, near Welford, from the late 1670s. Because of the troubled times he only educated 'a Few, (and it was but a Few)' students, though they 'proved valuable and useful Men' (Calamy, 'Funeral Sermon', 34; Calamy, 'Continuation', 2.587). There are few details about the academy or Shuttlewood's teaching. His students included Thomas Emlyn, who entered in 1678 and stayed four years, though he briefly left after only a year to enter Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1679 because of his dissatisfaction with Shuttlewood's library, which consisted of 'very few books, and them chiefly of one sort' ('Works', 1.vi). 
The Shuttlewoods' only son, John Shuttlewood (1667-1737), was minister of Mill Yard Independent meeting, Goodman's Field, London, and his youngest daughter married Thomas Gibbons, tutor at Homerton Academy. Gibbons had a number of Shuttlewood's manuscripts which Palmer used in his 'Nonconformist's Memorial'. Shuttlewood died at Little Creaton on 17 March 1689 and was buried in the churchyard. His monument inscription recorded that he was 'Multum dilectus multum deflendus' ('greatly loved, greatly to be mourned'). 


